QuestionKenntnis:
Would the One Ring even work for anyone but Sauron?
qn_description:
The temptation of the One Ring, we quickly learn, is always tied up with power: each character's fantasies of possessing it seem to be about what they would do with great power.  Even Sam, as I recall, imagines the power to create great huge sweeping gardens.  Boromir wants the power to save Gondor, etc.

But does the One Ring actually convey power to anyone but Sauron?  It actually seems to diminish its bearers: Bilbo feels "thin" and "stretched", Smeagol becomes the wretched Gollum, Frodo is never quite the same even after it is destroyed.  None of them seem more "powerful," even in the abstract way that magic-users in Tolkien operate.  No mention is made, that I can recall, of a Ringbearer having greater stature or authority, or of people naturally following them or obeying their commands, while they possess the Ring.

The accepted answer to this question implies that a being as powerful as Gandalf could dominate the Ring and break Sauron's hold over it, but even then Tolkien says that "It would have been the master in the end", and his descriptions of a Ringbearing Gandalf sound pretty much like Gandalf is using his own powers, not terribly augmented by the Ring:


  [Gandalf] would have remained 'righteous', but self-righteous. He would have continued to rule and order things for 'good', and the benefit of his subjects according to his wisdom (which was and would have remained great).


Now that sounds out of character for a being as humble as Gandalf, but it doesn't actually sound like something he would have been unable to do before.  It's a twisted motive, but not really an enhanced power.

Pretty much everyone in Middle Earth agrees that the One Ring will corrupt you, but they all seem to agree that it DOES convey great power even so.  Why?  Do we ever see any actual, "positive" effects from possessing the One Ring?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
The key quote from Tolkien that answers this is contained in Letter 246, with my added emphasis:


  It was part of the essential deceit of the Ring to fill minds with imaginations of supreme power.


This implies that the Ring is useless to anyone but Sauron, but it tempts you into thinking it's a source of power, and in that way it gets you to wear it, and so gains control over you.



In order to proceed in an investigation of this, and how to reconcile it with other statements made by Tolkien we must first establish a baseline that we're going to work from:


It is accepted that the Ring gave some degree of "power" to Isildur, Gollum, Bilbo, Frodo and Sam, in the form of invisibility, longevity and an occasionally enhanced presence.
Sauron was the maker of the Ring; he originally made it for his own use, and his own use only; he certainly never intended it to be used by anybody else, and he had no requirement for any of these three (as he already possessed them due to his nature as a Maia).
Therefore these three "powers" were not an intrinsic property of the Ring intended by it's maker, but rather side-effects of it being used by a mortal.
And these "powers" are actually quite minor compared to those possessed by a Maia.
There are different kinds of "power"; these minor (by comparison) "powers" are one kind that are available to mortals as Ring-bearers, but the power to raise armies, control others, defeat Sauron and rule Middle-earth is a completely different kind altogether.




Now let's look at what Tolkien says about the Ring, quoting from the same source as Shamshiel's answer:


  But even if he did not wear it, that power existed and was in 'rapport' with himself: he was not 'diminished'. Unless some other seized it and became possessed of it. If that happened, the new possessor could (if sufficiently strong and heroic by nature) challenge Sauron, become master of all that he had learned or done since the making of the One Ring, and so overthrow him and usurp his place.


Here it's important to look at what Tolkien says, and only at what Tolkien says.  Here's what he does not say (and note the emphasis):


Some other person is controlling the Ring.
That other person is gaining power from the Ring.
That other person is using that power against Sauron to defeat him.


And here's what he does say (emphasis again):


Some other person has claimed ownership of the Ring.
That other person has, through their own "sufficiently strong and heroic" nature, succeeded in taking that ownership of it from Sauron.
And Sauron as a result is diminished and can be defeated by the unenhanced other person (again, if "sufficiently strong and heroic").


This is an important but subtle distinction.  In the first case the other person is using the Ring to give themselves a "level up" against Sauron, to boost their own power and defeat him that way -- but that's not what Tolkien is saying.  In the second they're not doing this; the power in the Ring is quite useless to them but by being able to deny it to Sauron they diminish him and hence (though their own natural but unenhanced strength) are able to defeat him.

As for "become master of all that he had learned or done since the making of the One Ring" - Tolkien does not actually define what he means by this.  But since the greater part of Sauron's power is in the Ring, it seems reasonable to suggest that this "mastery" actually belongs to the Ring itself rather than to the wielder (hence "since the making of the One Ring"), who only obtains the "mastery" by proxy.


  But the Ring and all its works would have endured. It would have been the master in the end.




Now we'll continue by looking at some other sources.  First of all, the words of Galadriel:


  Before you could use that power you would need to become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others.


These seem to indicate that one could use the power of the Ring, but there are two traps being set for the careless reader here.  The first one I've mentioned already:


  It was part of the essential deceit of the Ring to fill minds with imaginations of supreme power.


And the second is mentioned elsewhere by Tolkien with reference to a different character in a different situation, but must surely also apply here:


  Treebeard is a character in my story, not me...


So what we actually have here is Galadriel being deceived by the Ring into thinking it can be used, and remembering that she is a character in the story, not Tolkien himself, her words must only be read as being in-character - they shouldn't be interpreted as Tolkien describing the way things are.

The same can be said of anyone else who describes using the Ring's power in a similar situation: Gandalf, Boromir, Denethor, even Elrond when he says "I will not take the Ring to wield it".



I'll round things off with some other observations, also from Letter 246.  First of all Tolkien equates taking control of the Ring with the Ring taking control of you:


  He needed time, much time, before he could control the Ring or (which in such a case is the same) before it could control him.


Then he establishes how difficult it is to face Sauron, even if you have tried to claim the Ring (and indicating that the Ring has no power over Sauron too):


  Sauron would not have feared the Ring! It was his own and under his will.


And then he reiterates that the upper hand in a contest with Sauron does not come from your possession of the Ring, but rather from Sauron's lack of it:


  On one side the true allegiance of the Ring to Sauron; on the other superior strength because Sauron was not actually in possession.




In summary - the answer is "no", the Ring wouldn't work for anyone else in the way they think it would (by granting them additional power or by being able to be used as a weapon), because remember:


  It was part of the essential deceit of the Ring to fill minds with imaginations of supreme power.


But "yes", it would work by causing Sauron to become diminished, provided they were strong enough to be able to take and retain control of it; they would remain limited to their own native ability in any contest against Sauron, however.
AnswerKenntnis:
Yes. Here is what Tolkien said:


  But to achieve this he had been obliged to let a great part of his own inherent power (a frequent and very significant motive in myth and fairy-story) pass into the One Ring. While he wore it, his power on earth was actually enhanced. But even if he did not wear it, that power existed and was in 'rapport' with himself: he was not 'diminished'. Unless some other seized it and became possessed of it. If that happened, the new possessor could (if sufficiently strong and heroic by nature) challenge Sauron, become master of all that he had learned or done since the making of the One Ring, and so overthrow him and usurp his place.


The reason we don't see the effects of the Ring all the time is threefold:


Because wielding the Ring takes effort and practice. "Before you could use that power you would need to become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others", in the words of Galadriel. In fact, she says that without this training, the Ring would destroy Frodo.
You have to actually claim the Ring as your own to truly use its power. Frodo and Bilbo never did this, and maybe Gollum just never had the strength. The moment Frodo claimed the Ring for his own, Sauron knew. "And far away, even as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed it for his own, even in Sammath Naur the very heart of his realm, the Power in Barad-Dur was shaken, and the Tower trembled from its foundations to its proud and bitter crown. The Dark Lord was suddenly aware of him[...]
The power of the Ring is not absolute. Sauron was able to dominate and subvert the Numenoreans only with time and subtlety. And the reason Sauron had to do that? "So great was the might and splendour of the N├║men├│reans that SauronΓÇÖs own servants deserted him." So even Sauron wielding the Ring wasn't able to control his own servants under some circumstances.


Bilbo and Gollum are actually good examples of the power of the Ring: forcing a mortal to stay alive is tremendous. The Ring doesn't grant you courage, strength, wisdom, or magic spells. It gives you the power to dominate others, strengthens your native ability to read minds, and, if you're  a mortal, forces you to stay alive - not even the Ring can fundamentally change fate decreed by Illuvatar; the Ring is already stretching The Rules quite a bit here.

The Ring granted Frodo and Sam it's chief power - domination over others - on several occasions, to subdue Gollum and to terrify Orcs. This was before Frodo even claimed the Ring. 


  Then suddenly, as before under the eaves of the Emyn Muil, Sam saw these two rivals with other vision. A crouching shape, scarcely more than the shadow of a living thing, a creature now wholly ruined and defeated, yet filled with a hideous lust and rage; and before it stood stern, untouchable now by pity, a figure robed in white, but at its breast it held a wheel of fire. Out of the fire there spoke a commanding voice.
  
  ΓÇÿBegone, and trouble me no more! If you touch me ever again, you shall be cast yourself into the Fire of Doom.ΓÇÖ
  
  The crouching shape backed away, terror in its blinking eyes, and yet at the same time insatiable desire.
  
  Then the vision passed and Sam saw Frodo standing, hand on breast, his breath coming in great gasps, and Gollum at his feet, resting on his knees with his wide-splayed hands upon the ground.


Or:


  For what it saw was not a short frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword: it saw a great silent shape, cloaked in a grey shadow, looming against the wavering light behind; in one hand it held a sword, the very light of which was a bitter pain, the other was clutched at its breast, but held concealed some nameless menace of power and doom. For a moment the Orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp of fear it turned and fled back as it had come.


We also have some examples of what would have happened, from Tolkien's letters. For example, what if Gollum hadn't been there at Mount Doom?


  Frodo too would then probably, if not attacked, have had to take the same way: cast himself with the Ring into the abyss. If not he would of course have completely failed. It is an interesting problem: how Sauron would have acted or the claimant have resisted. Sauron sent at once the Ringwraiths. They were naturally fully instructed, and in no way deceived as to the real lordship of the Ring. The wearer would not be invisible to them, but the reverse; and the more vulnerable to their weapons. But the situation was now different to that under Weathertop, where Frodo acted merely in fear and wished only to use (in vain) the Ring's subsidiary power of conferring invisibility. He had grown since then. Would they have been immune from its power if he claimed it as an instrument of command and domination?
  Not wholly. I do not think they could have attacked him with violence, nor laid hold upon him or taken him captive; they would have obeyed or feigned to obey any minor commands of his that did not interfere with their errand ΓÇô laid upon them by Sauron, who still through their nine rings (which he held) had primary control of their wills. That errand was to remove Frodo from the Crack. Once he lost the power or opportunity to destroy the Ring, the end could not be in doubt ΓÇô saving help from outside, which was hardly even remotely possible.
  Frodo had become a considerable person, but of a special kind: in spiritual enlargement rather than in increase of physical or mental power; his will was much stronger than it had been, but so far it had been exercised in resisting not using the Ring and with the object of destroying it. He needed time, much time, before he could control the Ring or (which in such a case is the same) before it could control him; before his will and arrogance could grow to a stature in which he could dominate other major hostile wills. Even so for a long time his acts and commands would still have to seem 'good' to him, to be for the benefit of others beside himself. 


It also granted Sam the ability to understand the speech of Orcs, and Frodo was able to understand Galadriel's thoughts: "[Frodo] perceived my thought more clearly than many who are accounted wise."

However, in the end, the Ring - as essentially distilled Sauron and "power" - would have turned anyone who used it "evil." From Tolkien's letters:


  In any case Elrond or Galadriel would have proceeded in the policy now adopted by Sauron: they would have built up an empire with great and absolutely subservient generals and armies and engines of war, until they could challenge Sauron and destroy him by force. 
  
  Confrontation of Sauron alone, unaided, self to self was not contemplated. One can imagine the scene in which Gandalf, say, was placed in such a position. It would be a delicate balance. On one side the true allegiance of the Ring to Sauron; on the other superior strength because Sauron was not actually in possession, and perhaps also because he was weakened by long corruption and expenditure of will in dominating inferiors. If Gandalf proved the victor, the result would have been for Sauron the same as the destruction of the Ring; for him it would have been destroyed, taken from him for ever. But the Ring and all its works would have endured. It would have been the master in the end.
  
  Gandalf as Ring-Lord would have been far worse than Sauron. He would have remained ΓÇÿrighteousΓÇÖ, but self-righteous. He would have continued to rule and order things for ΓÇÿgoodΓÇÖ, and the benefit of his subjects according to his wisdom (which was and would have remained great)."


EDIT: To clarify, the One Ring did enhance Sauron's powers as well, and it was not created solely to control the wielders of the other Great Rings.

From Tolkien's letters, the Ring was created in "his [Sauron's] effort (largely unsuccessful) to enslave the Elves, and in his desire to establish a control over the minds and wills of his servants."

Additionally, we know Sauron used the One Ring to subjugate the Numenoreans. From Letter 211:


  He naturally had the One Ring, and so very soon dominated the minds and wills of most of the N├║men├│reans.


Thus, the Ring could be used by Sauron used to dominate the minds and wills of people who were not wearing other rings. Wielding another one of the Great Rings only seems to have made you especially vulnerable.

The reason we didn't see any amazing tricks from Frodo or Sam (beyond terrifying and subjugating Gollum, Orcs, etc.) is explained in the book, and in one of my quotes above. Frodo asks Galadriel why he can't use the Ring to know the thoughts of the wielders of the Three:


  'Only thrice have you set the Ring upon your finger since you knew what you possessed. Do no try! It would destroy you. Did not Gandalf tell you the rings give power according to the measure of their possessor? Before you could use that power you would need to become far stronger, and train your will to the domination of others.'


Using the power of the Ring is not as simple as "put it on, get amazing results."
AnswerKenntnis:
Yes -- the One Ring seems to "work" for beings other than Sauron, as Samshiel says. The relevant factor is not just possession of the Ring, but consciously trying to use it to exert power over others. I think Gandalf remarked that the Ring granted Smeagol "power according to his stature" -- so all he could do was commit petty acts of evil, for which he was eventually cast out of his homeland. 

As for the others, Frodo, Bilbo and Sam seldom or never used the One Ring in this way. Isildur is an interesting case. The power of the Ring might have helped him make Gondor stronger than it would otherwise have been, by eliminating any remaining enemies. He was ambushed and killed before he could do the same in Arnor, which may be one reason why Gondor endured while Arnor collapsed into civil war and ruin. On the other hand, Isildur was already an exceptionally capable individual, unchallenged as King, and most of his enemies had been destroyed or scattered at the Battle of the Last Alliance, so he may not have needed much assistance from the Ring.

I think that power proportionate to the wielder's own strength is the key point. So Smeagol only had petty abilities. Someone like Aragorn or Boromir might have become a great and merciless conqueror, much like Genghis Khan with added longevity. (He might end up like the Witch-King of Angmar, only more powerful and not owing allegiance to any other being.) Finally, a being like Gandalf, Saruman or Galadriel might have become a godlike figure, as powerful as Sauron himself or even more so.

I can see how Gandalf might have been even more terrifying than Sauron, if he was corrupted by the Ring. Sauron doesn't care if his subjects argue among themselves, drink beer, play games, or whatever as long as they obey his commands. Gandalf the Ringlord would not allow that kind of disorderly behaviour. Arguing, fighting, eating too much cake, or ignoring a "do not walk on the grass" sign would incur dire punishment. Recreation would mean gathering to sing songs in praise of Gandalf's benevolent rule.

(FYI Meat Trademark: Stack Exchange doesn't allow comments until you have a reputation rating of at least 50. So new users (like me) can only contribute by posting new replies.)
AnswerKenntnis:
To bolster the answer of Yes already stated by other answers, we do see that Frodo was granted the power to percieve the other Rings of Power. Specifically, he was able to see Galadriel's ring:


  'Yes', she said, divining his though, 'it is not permitted to speak of it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be hidden from the Ring-bearer, and one who has seen the Eye. Verily it is in the land of Lorien upon the finger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains. This is Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am it's keeper.'
AnswerKenntnis:
This is more of a supplementary answer because I don't want to repeat what was mentioned in the answers already.

Short answer: No, it only works for Sauron; because it only gives him the advantages; it doesn't give anyone else any advantages of using it.

Long answer:
We really never seen any examples of Sauron himself being augmented with powers due to the ring. For example, Sauron might have had superior strength but compared to what? Before the ring? We were never given any comparisons of his strength. In fact, there is no mention of him using the ring for any other purpose than to control the other rings. He was probably just as strong as he was before together WITH IT; but once he's separated, Sauron would be weaker than ever before.

Before I continue, I'll pose a question, how does the ring make him (or anyone) else more powerful? He basically just transferred his native power into it; but that's it. He simply transferred energy, not augment it. When we transfer something, we mean we displace "something" from one container.. to another; what this means is that the transfer has weakened Sauron himself.. but the ring's purpose has been empowered; this is proven by the fact that when he was departed from the ring, it exposed his true weakened state and had to go into hiding.

Power is really all about perspective here. Like what does it mean to be truly powerful? 

To discuss the meaning of absolute power we could suggest the following:


There should not be any need for any defense mechanisms, such as the power to vanish since there's nothing to hide or run away from. We could argue that vanishing doesn't mean it's a defense mechanism, but we could still argue the point on having it as a feature.

However, all examples of reasons why someone would vanish is to hide and protect themselves from being discovered. When we talk about concealing, we do not think about the context of power here.

There should not be a need to create these "ring satellites" and deceive the other races of men, dwarves, and elves into wearing them so that they'd be manipulated and controlled. The ring would enable Sauron to force any race into submitting to his will. The ring would be powerful enough by itself to get Sauron what he needed.

Sauron had to DISGUISE himself as "Annatar" the "lord of gifts", into creating rings to control them.

It would be impossible for the ring to be separated from the master, there would be no weak points in it.

Sauron was separated from the ring by a single slash of a sword cutting his finger off, no thanks to Isildur 



So with all these points in mind, we could suggest that the ring really serves one purpose, that is to deceive and weaken the enemies of Sauron, which would then allow Sauron to take advantage over them. It would NOT weaken all enemies, just the ones connected with the ring.

Examples:
The vanishing feature, though used as a defense mechanism for the ring bearer, it doesn't augment their power.. but it does give Sauron an advantage to discovering the vicinity of their location.

Being possessed, puts them at a disadvantage from being discovered as they are walking into enemy territory, risking themselves in getting caught or captured.
AnswerKenntnis:
Both answers so far have overlooked that old Tom Bombadil was unaffected by the ring when he put it on his finger. Yes, some beings (of stronger magic) would be able to take control as Gandalf and Galadriel described.

I think they were right about its corruptive abilities as well. Both would have been subject to the corruption from it through the rings that they already wore, and they had seen what became of the individuals who put on that one ring.
AnswerKenntnis:
Why do we assume that the ring benefitted Sauron at all?  Every person who had it became obsessed with it and had to acquire it at all costs.  They also seemed to suffer from the delusion that it possessed "great power" beyond invisibility.  It seems reasonable to assume Sauron was affected too, and that's why he wanted it so badly - much the same way as Gollum did.  After all, everything we know about him is supposition from the other characters.  Gandalf saw Sauron's forces desperately trying to recover the ring and ASSUMED it had great magical power (or why else would he be trying to recover it), but it fact it was just a cursed "Addiction Ring" tied to Sauron's life force.
AnswerKenntnis:
To the question: Yes. Additionally...

1) The one-ring had awareness and a personality and seduces the wearer into doing it's bidding. For an inanimate object, that's a lot.

2) Power to control other powers is power. The brain is not very powerful outside the body.

3) It seems the great power of the one-ring is to cast illusions which it uses to both seduce and empower it's bearer. As advertisers can attest, it is not an insignificant power.
AnswerKenntnis:
There is one thing missing in this discussion as it concerns Gandalf's real stature.  Gandalf is also one of the Ainur.  He is Maiar (lesser of the Ainur) and was sent to middle earth with the other Istari (wizards) by Manwe. They Istari did so but in a diminished form which apparently included lack of full awareness of who they really were.  Regardless, when considering the effects of the ring on its wearer, Gandalf should not be grouped with Galadriel, Elrond or any others. The ring would perhaps of "unlocked" his full nature and I suspect he would have been less affected by its corrupting nature.  Gandalf in this condition would likely have been able to directly challenge Sauron 1:1 and overthrown him.  For elves and men the ring would have corrupted and betrayed them and I do not think they could have mastered the ring. Saruman (also Maiar like Sauron) probably understood this in his bones and his own corruption was likely due to visions of possessing the ring and being able to "fix" middle-earth for the better.

Unfinished Tales Part Four Chapter II 'The Istari' pp. 508ΓÇô509
AnswerKenntnis:
I believe it is a reasonable assumption that because Sauron is a servant of Morgoth/Melkore, the ring would have worked for them and possibly sought him if he had still been a factor.
AnswerKenntnis:
I'm not sure why everyone's being so philosophical, the ring works just fine on Frodo.

How so? Let's recall what it does:


  One ring to rule them all, one ring to find them,
  
  One ring to bring them all, and in the darkness bind them


So,


Bring them all: Frodo is certainly found by/finds/happens upon a whole bunch of ring bearers - most of the human rings and all of the Elven ones. As for the Dwarf rings, well, that feature never worked for Mairon either. So, [Γ£ö].
Find them: When Frodo puts the ring on, I recall he is very noticeable to other rings bearers (at least, the Human rings), and vice versa. See also this detailed answer. Now, probably a more experienced/corrupted/powerful bearer of the one ring would be better with this perceptive skill, but I'll put this one down as [Γ£ö].
Bind them: The Elven rings avoided the binding by design, and the Dwarven rings just didn't have that effect like Mairon wanted to, so it's basically the Human rings. Given that 'to rule them' is a separate point than the 'binding', you could claim that they're still bound to the ring, and in many senses to whoever it is that's wearing it, even if he's not ruling them. So, [sort-of-Γ£ö].
Rule them: Here is point where everybody's arguments come in. Now, Ok, maybe you don't get to boss (non-)people so easily, and maybe you need to be a powerful Maia. So, [Γ£û].


Three out of Four is pretty good, considering how Frodo is not really the ruling type. Anyway, whoever expects the ring to do other things for him should RTFM, which is conveniently printed on the ring itself :-)
AnswerKenntnis:
Sauron and his master, Morgoth, were a dichotomy of darkness: Morgoth corrupted nature, and Sauron exploited the corruption. Without Morgoth, Sauron was nothing, but once the world had been made with Morgoth embedded in it, Sauron had ample opportunity. All living beings, being made of the matter/cosmic data that Morgoth infected, had a hint of corruption, and were fodder for Sauron's exploitation in specific circumstances. The forging of the rings of power was a scheme by which Sauron could create these circumstances more easily. Witness, for example, the greed of the dwarves. Ownership of the ring kept by Thorin's house was a mark of rulership for his clan. The dwarven rings increased the greed of dwarf kings, which in turn led them to drive their subjects harder and more recklessly. Presumably, the One's rulership over the other rings allowed Sauron to change their power levels, corrupting those who had them with greed or else making them over-reliant on the rings' power, and thus reliant on Sauron. Sauron was a power player, setting up his dopes like pieces on a chess board, and then activating them with one master stroke. They would relate to each other in predictable ways, weakening each other and strengthening him, and when all was said and done he'd be the winner. His only weakness was that he often interfered with forces that were beyond his ken, particularly Illuvatar. After the raid on Valinor, the powerful in Middle Earth became deathly fearful of his potential, forcing him to resort to brute force and sorcery.
QuestionKenntnis:
Who or what was Tom Bombadil?
qn_description:
The most iconic of Middle-earth questions:

Who or what was Tom Bombadil?

Was he an elf? Was he akin to Gandalf, and one of the wizardly stock?  Was he somethingΓÇª else?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Tom Bombadil wasn't an elf: Frodo and Strider/Aragorn both know enough about elves at the point Tom Bombadil is introduced to recognize them on sight, and they both act and behave as though he was something foreign and strange.

Tom Bombadil was not a wizard (a member of the Istari): there were only five sent to protect and guide the races of Middle Earth during the Third Age: Saruman the White, Gandalf the Grey, Radagast the Brown, and the two wizards Alatar and Pallando.

However, Tom Bombadil displays several curious characteristics that can provide some guidance as to what he is or if he fits into the rest of the Middle Earth mythology:


Everyone that seems to know him believe him to have been around for a really long time, possibly for multiple ages.
He calls the Old Forest, an offshoot of the forests that once covered Middle Earth and were the home to the Ents, his home and seems to be its master.
Additionally, everyone that seems to know him believe him to be more powerful than any other being they know (and the people that know him know a bunch of really powerful beings)
He is completely unaffected by the One Ring (whereas really powerful beings like Sauron, Gandalf, and Saruman are)
Likewise, he seems to have very little concern for the politics of the world around him.


One theory is that he's part of the so-called Ainur: direct representatives of Il├║vatar (the creator). Depending on how you look at it, Ainur are either gods and demigods or something similar to angels; but pantheism, where the Ainur are merely different aspects of Il├║vatar, more closely describes the mythology of Middle Earth.

The Ainur are broken into two groups: 


The Valar, which consist of the chief agents of Il├║vatar (think the Roman or Greek pantheon), including L├│rien, Mandos, Manw├½, and Morgoth/Melkor among others.
The Maiar, which consist of servants and aides of the Valar (think demi-gods or archangels). The Maiar include figures like Sauron (Morgoth's right hand) and the Istari.


There's speculation that he's a Maia, as he appears to be immortal, isn't a named Vala, and could feasibly be the agent of Yavanna (Vala of nature). However, other Maiar we're exposed to seem to be fully capable of succumbing to the One Ring's power in a way that Tom Bombadil isn't.

Other theories include that he's an incarnation of a Vala. However, it's not clear the Valar take incarnations: throughout Tolkien's works, Valar, when they want to interact, send agents or interact directly as themselves.

In reality, Tolkien never defines what Tom Bombadil is: not in The Lord of the Rings or in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil. The closest thing to a definition that Tolkien gives of Tom is that he's extremely old, and simply is.

To this end, the third and final theory, that Tom Bombadil is an incarnation of Il├║vatar himself, takes hold. Il├║vatar would definitely not be subject to the corruption of the One Ring, would be far more powerful and older than even the most powerful of the Ainur, and care little for the day-to-day struggles of the mortal and immortal races. Finally, the characteristic that Tom Bombadill simply is is similar to how Yahweh, the god of Abraham and Moses, characterizes himself: I am.

But it's best not to think of it too deeply. Tolkien was loathe to create allegories and allusions, saying of The Lord of the Rings:


  As for any inner meaning or 'message', it has in the intention of the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. [...] 
  
  But I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and have done so since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence. I much prefer history, true or feigned, with all its varied applicability to the thought and experience of readers.
AnswerKenntnis:
'And even in a mythical Age there must
  be some enigmas, as there always are.
  Tom Bombadil is one (intentionally).'


The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien, No 144, dated 1954
AnswerKenntnis:
Out of universe, Tolkien has two remarks published in Letters that explain who Bombadil is meant to be; the first in Letter 19:


  Tom Bombadil, the spirit of the (vanishing) Oxford and Berkshire countryside...


And the second in Letter 144, first the background (excerpting quite heavily):


  Tom Bombadil is not an important person ΓÇô to the narrative ... he represents something that I feel important, though I would not be prepared to analyze the feeling precisely ... the story is cast in terms of a good side, and a bad side ... but both sides ... want a measure of control.


And then Tom's role in all of this:


  But if you have, as it were taken 'a vow of poverty', renounced control, and take your delight in things for themselves without reference to yourself, watching, observing, and to some extent knowing, then the question of the rights and wrongs of power and control might become utterly meaningless to you, and the means of power quite valueless. It is a natural pacifist view, which always arises in the mind when there is a war.


In universe, we know he's not Eru from Letter 153, first of all from the intro:


  He also cited the description of Bombadil by Goldberry: 'He is.' Hastings said that this seemed to imply that Bombadil was God.


Then Tolkien's rebuttal (I've left out a lot here and refer you to Letters for the full discussion):


  As for Tom Bombadil, I really do think you are being too serious, besides missing the point. (Again the words used are by Goldberry and Tom not me as a commentator) ... Frodo has
  asked not 'what is Tom Bombadil' but 'Who is he' ... Only the firstperson (of worlds or anything) can be unique. If you say he is there must be more than one, and created (sub) existence is implied. I can say 'he is' of Winston Churchill as well as of Tom Bombadil, surely?


Aside from the "enigma" quote in Letter 144, there is another source for who Bombadil may be, and that's given in the published Silmarillion, chapter 2, which itself was derived from a late essay called Of the Ents and the Eagles:


  Behold! When the Children awake, then the thought of Yavanna will awake also, and it will summon spirits from afar, and they will go among the kelvar and the olvar, and some will dwell therein, and be held in reverence...


This is IMO a credible source.  Tom is evidently a nature spirit, and this source explains the origin of nature spirits in Middle-earth (note also that only "some will dwell therein"; evidently there are others that won't).

The only thing left out is Tom's claim to be "Eldest", and here I'm going to refer to a passage from Letter 153 which I quoted earlier and will quote again:


  the words used are by Goldberry and Tom not me as a commentator.


This is important, and it must be emphasised: for all of the claims made about Tom, Goldberry is saying them, Tom is saying them, but Tolkien is not.  These are words spoken and claims made by characters in Tolkien's world, not by Tolkien himself.  This is a point that Tolkien returns to in the context of Treebeard, also in Letter 153:


  Treebeard is a character in my story, not me; and though he has a great memory and some earthy wisdom, he is not one of the Wise, and there is quite a lot he does not know or understand.


There's a clear distinction being made here, and that is that words spoken or claims made by a character in the story should not be seen as a definitive authorial statement, and the same should be borne in mind when considering Tom.
AnswerKenntnis:
Here is a pretty in depth essay on the possible identity of Tom Bombadil, and it also has a lot of interesting links.

http://www.cas.unt.edu/~hargrove/bombadil.html

I thought it was particularly interesting that while Tolkien wanted to leave some enigmas in his writing, he also probably had an explanation for himself since he liked to reconcile any "errors". So the fact that Tom Bombadil was conceived as a separate story and later integrated into LotR doesn't mean that he didn't have an idea of how Tom fits into the overall universe.
AnswerKenntnis:
I believe, rather fancifully, that Bombadil is simply the spirit of middle earth manifest as a sentient, magical being. He might have acted as guardian of the ancient places and as these places diminished so did Bombadil's influence. However, he will always be as unassailable and unknowable as the very earth itself!
AnswerKenntnis:
Tolkien - in one of his letters - specifically stated that Bombadill is not Illuvatar. There is a reference in Tolkien's earlier writings to nature spirits (Fays, Leprawns) and such, and my own feeling is that Bombadill is one of these - a being as old as the world whose purpose may occasionally intersect those of the Valar (and in this case Sauron), but who works out his own task under Eru and takes little part in the struggles of Elves, Men and demons. Tom's remit is to do with the Earth itself and his power and remit are dealt according to that. He is outside the 'politics' of the peoples of the Earth, but not immune should Sauron crush nature itself. Whilst not a maia undoubtedly Yavanna (as instructed by Eru) would know of Bombadill, his fellows and their modus operandii. One of the mischevious folk; seemingly anarchic and a law unto themselves, but built into the fabric of the world since its beginnings by Eru (or a byproduct of the dissonnances  between Melkor's discord and Eru's harmony in the Great Music, but still extant by the sovereign will of Eru Himself and given purpose by Him).
AnswerKenntnis:
He was there before anything else yet he is not Iluvatar - that only leaves the real creator of that world - so for my money TB is Tolkien
AnswerKenntnis:
Bombadil has to be a Maia. He himself said he was alive before the Big People. Who are elves and men. Tolkien said Bombadil wasn't Eru in his letters. There was nothing else in the Silmarillion before the elves besides Eru, the Valar, and the Maiar. 


  Eldest, that's what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the rivers and the trees; Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first acorn. He made paths before the Big People, and saw the little People arriving. He was here before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed westward, Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. He knew the dark under the stars when it was fearless - before the Dark Lord came from Outside.  


~ The Fellowship of the Ring
AnswerKenntnis:
I once read a fairly convincing theory that Bombadil is the manifestation of Arda,  the world. Alas I cannot find the article again to link to it.
AnswerKenntnis:
No-one really knows for sure, but my favourite theory is that he is the physical incarnation of Arda (The planet the continent of Middle-Earth is part of).
QuestionKenntnis:
How long was Bill Murray's character supposed to be in a time loop in the film "Groundhog Day"?
qn_description:
I've often wondered how long Bill Murray's character was supposed to be in his time loop before he got out of it. You could count the number of days depicted in the movie, but there are parts that reference that he had spent a much longer time between scenes not shown.

It seems that it could not have been shorter than several months, to a year at the minimum, for him to have learned may of the things that he is shown learning (like playing the Piano, Ice Sculpture and such). However, it could have been years, or decades?

Perhaps somewhere in the script, or maybe the writers of the film or director's commentary or someplace like that have given some sort of indication as to what kind of time scale they were thinking it should have been while writing/making the movie?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Allow me to jump in here.  Hi everyone.  As mentioned above my original intent was that Phil would live for longer than a single lifetime.  That was the point of the original script: to see how a person might change if he lived longer than one lifetime (it was always about a man who could not escape life).  The studio felt that the loop shouldn't last longer than two weeks.  They were afraid the audience would freak out if it lasted any longer.  Because my bookcase calendar (also mentioned above) was a specific record of passing time, Harold chose to remove it from the script, and in that way he could tell the studio it lasted two weeks or whatever and nobody could point to anything in the script that contradicted that.  This explains why the length of Phil's incarceration strikes so many as a mystery: it was designed to be a mystery.  Still, the sensibility of the characters as they progressed I think required a guiding clock, and Harold provided that.  His sense was that it lasted about ten years, and I think the movie reflects that sensibility.

Still, I think it's fun the way people keep guessing and counting and arguing.  My answer shouldn't discourage that pursuit.  Who ever said that I know what I'm talking about, anyhow?
AnswerKenntnis:
There are 2 official responses, both from Harold Ramis ("Groundhog Day" director).


First response (later one) is 30-40 years.

From http://www.wolfgnards.com/index.php/2009/08/18/harold-ramis-responds-to-the-wolf-gnards


  Harold Ramis emailed the Heeb offices with this message:
  
  
    "I think the 10-year estimate is too short. It takes at least 10 years to get good at anything, and alloting for the down time and misguided years he spent, it had to be more like 30 or 40 yearsΓÇª People [like the blogger] have way too much time on their hands. They could be learning to play the piano or speak French or sculpt."
  



That reply of Ramis was due to an earlier analysis (linked to by DampeS8N in a comment: 
http://www.wolfgnards.com/index.php/2009/06/16/how-long-does-billy-murray-spend-in-grou)


  Which puts us at the grand total of 3176 repeated Groundhog days, or 453 weeks, or 105 months, or 8.7 years. Precisely, 8 years, 8 months, and 16 days. So, in the end Harold Ramis was right and I wasted a Bill Murray length of my time. But I made the hash marks, and I was going to do the math!



Of course, that quote from wolfgnards refers to a SECOND figure supplied by Ramis himself, in an earlier DVD commentary:


  According to Harold Ramis, on the Groundhog Day DVD commentary, Bill Murray spent 10 years trapped in his own little corner of hell... Punxsutawney 



A separate very involved analysis confirmed the 30-40 year estimate.

http://whatculture.com/film/just-how-many-days-does-bill-murray-really-spend-stuck-reliving-groundhog-day.php


  33 years and 358 days (12,403 days)



To top it off, several resources pointed out that the original script stated it was 10,000 years!.

However I was never able to find the relevant quote in a relevant script so I remain a bit skeptical of that tidbit
AnswerKenntnis:
DVK's answer mentions that "several resources pointed out that the original script stated it was 10,000 years!" but that he was unable to find a quote in the script. That number isn't accurate, but the original intent was for him to be there an indescribably long time. According to a post on writer Danny Rubin's blog:


  In my original draft I had created a device to help audiences feel the massiveness of time on PhilΓÇÖs shoulders. It was my version of five-bundled hatch marks on a prison wall, which of course would not work for Phil as each morning the marks would be gone.   My solution was a wall-length bookcase in the Bed and Breakfast.  Every day Phil would read a single page from a single book.  Every now and then we would see him finish the first chapter, then the whole book, then the last book in the row.  On one sad day we see him finish the last page of the last book in the bookcase ΓÇô only to then have to walk back to the very first book and begin again. 


(He specifically disavows the specific "10,000 years" value elsewhere in that post.)
QuestionKenntnis:
Why didn't Gandalf or Frodo Fly to Mount Doom?
qn_description:
Why didn't Gandalf use his eagles to fly over Mount Doom and drop the ring? I know he feared what he would do if the ring overpowered him, so why not just give Frodo an eagle?
And, if there would be too much risk in flying the ring to Mordor, couldn't the eagles fly them part of the way?  Why risk it with such a long walk; far less risky to fly over most of the journey.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
In short, the eagles would also be tempted to take the ring.  At least, I've always assumed they'd rule Middle Earth with an iron claw.

Here's an excellent rundown of in-universe explanations, and a few real-world ones.  It summarizes frequent Usenet discussions in rec.arts.books.tolkien of the so-called "eagle plan" whereby the eagles are used to fly the ring to Mount Doom.  It's definitely a popular plot hole to discuss, with many pros and cons outlined there.

I think it would undermine the theme of the story, that it's about normal people taking responsibility for the world, and throwing off the dependence on ancient powers (Gandalf and Sauron included).

Also, it'd be a 10 page story.
AnswerKenntnis:
Giant Eagles with Wizards on their back would have been seen for miles. Even a normal Elf like Legolas could spot small flying birds at some distance, the Eye of Sauron would be looking to keep his borders safe, from above and below. Sauron also had the Nazgul air force after all, and maybe others too :) 

Not to mention the fact that they would have been extremely vulnerable in such a position, and likely to be brought down, and if that happened over Mordor, it would have guaranteed that Sauron got his ring back.

In terms of military strategy, it would be more of a "Hail Mary" than a solid plan, with a high risk of catastrophic failure.

With Sauron's combined forces being so strong by the time the Ring was discovered, it meant a full-on attack would be highly unlikely to succeed, and so only a covert mission would do. The point of sending Hobbits on foot was that they had showed resilience to the Ring's corrupting influence, but also that they would be unsuspected, as Hobbits were considered rather unimportant folk. 

It's also worth noting that the Giant Eagles, much like the Wizards of Middle Earth, were forbidden in directly helping mortals overcoming problems they could solve themselves. They could only advise or otherwise get tangentially involved.
AnswerKenntnis:
This is not a plot hole.  The Eagles are the representatives of Manwe in Middle Earth.  As mentioned in the link in the accepted answer.  


  I am surprised that this argument comes up as often as it does,
  because I am aware of no textual support for this idea. The eagles
  quite frequently involve themselves in the fight against Sauron (or
  against evil in general):
  
  They rescue Bilbo, Thorin, & Co. from the orcs and wolves. They
  participate in the Battle of Five Armies. They rescue Gandalf from
  Orthanc. They rescue Gandalf again from Zirak-Zigil. They directly
  attack the flying Nazg├╗l during the last battle. They fly into Mordor
  to rescue Frodo and Sam. Given all this heavy involvement, it would be
  extremely surprising if the Valar specifically prohibited the eagles
  from flying the Ringbearer into Mordor. Tolkien nowhere mentions such
  a prohibition.
  
  The only support I can see for this argument is very indirect: namely,
  that the eagles are said to be the representatives of Manw├½, and in
  the Third Age, Manw├½ is maintaining a policy of the Valar not
  intervening directly in the affairs of Middle-Earth. But the eagles do
  often intervene in the struggles of Middle-Earth, and there's no
  indication that they were under some restriction in this case. If the
  eagles were prohibited from being involved directly in the struggle
  against Sauron, we might expect that they would have withdrawn to
  Valinor long ago rather than remain in Middle-Earth.


If you look at the involvement of the Eagles it is very similar to the involvement of the Istari.  The Istari are Maia sent to Middle Earth as guides and to provide some help in countering the great powers of those who had fallen.  They are not allowed to solve the problems of Middle Earth, only to guide and aid those who are solving those problems.  The Eagles play a similar role.  Both are forces of the Valar -- who, after the first age that destroyed vast swaths of Middle Earth, vowed never again to interfere directly in the affairs of the mortals of Middle Earth -- and both aid those fighting Sauron.  But only where the mortals of Middle Earth could not over come the foe on their own.  

The ring is a foe that the mortals of Middle Earth could overcome.  And in a way, it is the one foe they must overcome on their own.  Gandalf guides them to this realization and helps them figure out the "how".  But he will not defeat the foe itself.  

Gandalf aids them by defeating a peer who had fallen, against which none of them could stand (the Balrog) and by helping to counter the movements of one of the Istari who had fallen.  The Eagles aid them by providing some mobility and countering forces of the enemy when they take to the air, the realm of Manwe, which mortals are not truly supposed to enter.  

All of these actions are consistent with the way the Valar are willing to aid those of Middle Earth.  However, flying the ring bearer to Mordor is not consistent with them.  That would be direct involvement and solving the one problem that those of Middle Earth need to solve themselves -- their lust for power at the expense of Middle Earth itself.
AnswerKenntnis:
You want an "In Universe" explanation?

Because it couldn't have worked any other way.


   The powers knew no one could willingly destroy the ring, therefore they needed the tussle between Frodo and Gollum, and for Gollum to fall for the ring to be destroyed.


If they'd flown on Eagles then Gollum wouldn't have been there, Frodo would have failed to destroy the ring, Sauron would have won and the fourth age would have been one of darkness across the face of Middle Earth.
AnswerKenntnis:
There are several explanations, both in and out of universe:


The Nazghul (more specifically their fell beasts) would have been able to take them out.
Anything flying into Mordor, especially a rarely-seen giant eagle, would be quickly spotted by Sauron, who would immediately muster every force he had around and in Mount Doom. Frodo and Sam were specifically trying to avoid the Eye's gaze.
If the eagle (or whomever was riding it) missed dropping/throwing the Ring directly into the fires of Mount Doom, they'd be handing the Ring directly to Sauron's forces.
Tolkien mentioned in notes and conversations that he did not want the eagles to be seen as "Middle Earth taxis". They thus intervene directly only in times of great need, as the last option.
AnswerKenntnis:
All that plus the eagles weren't available at the time the Ring set out on its journey from Rivendell, a journey meant to be made in secret so as to not reveal to Sauron that the Ring was on the move and to what end (to the very end Sauron was under the impression that the Ring, after having been found, would appear on the hand of one of his enemies to be wielded as a weapon of war, rather than being sent to its doom in the forges where it was created).

Sending in an eagle bearing a hobbit on its back, the hobbit bearing the ring (the presence of which Sauron could detect at some distance) would have attracted too much attention, revealed to Sauron that things are not as they seem (most likely he assumed either Gandalf or the lords of Minas Tirith would unveil the Ring in the battle at the gates of Mordor).
AnswerKenntnis:
Personally, I think something is only a plot-hole if there aren't plausible in-universe explanations, regardless of whether the author actually enumerates those explanations.

In this case, I always assumed that while there were just nine Nazg├╗l, there were a lot more than nine of the "fell beasts" that they flew around on--there's no indication that these creatures were made especially for the Nazg├╗l, or that there's some kind of limited supply of them.

Sauron raising a bunch of flying creatures in Mordor makes it a lot more risky for the eagles to fly there, let alone to fly there with the one ring. After the ring is destroyed, though, it makes sense that the beasts' handlers have scattered and that it's safer to mount an airborne rescue mission than it was before Sauron's defeat.

That's my "extrapolated from the given information" reasoning, at least.
AnswerKenntnis:
My understanding was the eagles have a will of their own. After all, Gandalf asked for permission to ride on their backs. Given this assumption, trusting them as companions to the ring bearer would not have been a good idea since they would be vulnerable to the rings power of corruption. Also, it would be unlikely they would agree to a suicide run into Mordor.
AnswerKenntnis:
There's a new theory as to why the eagles weren't used here, which seems plausible.

Briefly:


   Gandalf did intend to take the ring to the eagles, but kept the plan to himself so that word couldn't get to Sauron. He tried to tell the Fellowship about the plan when he fell to the Balrog -- that's what he meant by "Fly, you fools".
AnswerKenntnis:
There are some compelling reasons:
AnswerKenntnis:
@user296 hints at a possible reason but doesn't elaborate much.

I think that even though Gandalf can't see the future, he knows Gollum has a part to play:


  even the very wise cannot see all ends. ... he is bound up with the
  fate of the Ring. My heart tells me that he has some part to play yet,
  for good or ill, before the end; and when that comes, the pity of
  Bilbo may rule the fate of many ΓÇô yours not least.


(Fellowship of the Ring)

I think Gandalf knows more than he lets on. When Sam and Frodo fight about killing or abandoning Gollum we are again reminded that he has a part to play. Its kind of assumed that the part Gollum plays is leading them into Mordor. But I suspect that the real part he plays is in getting rid of the ring, and Gandalf knows this. 

We know that it is near impossible to give up the ring. Only three times does the ring-bearer give up the ring: 


Bilbo, who doesn't expect it to be destroyed.
Tom Bombadil, who is obviously "special".
Sam, who isn't so close to Mount Doom to be totally overrun by its power.


So Gandalf suspects that the only way the ring can be destroyed is on accident. In other words there has to be some accident at Mount Doom to destroy the ring. He says somewhere that no one is powerful enough to destroy it. If the Eagles just drop Frodo off with the ring, there's a lot of evidence that he won't be able to destroy it.


It is always seeking its master, not trying to be destroyed
When he does get near to destroying it, Frodo hesitates
Isildur was in the same position and didn't destroy it.
AnswerKenntnis:
The eagles don't owe allegiance to anyone they helped Gandalf escape Saruman because he saved the life of their king, see the Hobbit.  Nursing him back to health after an unfortunate incident with a hunters spear.  Whether that help advanced to a suicide run into Mordor is another thing entirely...
AnswerKenntnis:
Who can say with any confidence that Gandalf didn't intend to use the Eagles, even if just for a section of the total journey?

After Gandalf dies, the members of the Fellowship are frustrated time and again that Gandalf did not reveal his master plan for getting the Ring to Mount Doom before his death. Strider in particular is repeatedly frustrated over the impossible decisions that keep arising on the journey and laments several times that his decisions were wrong in retrospect (from his limited perspective at the time, but not from the grand perspective of the story).

I don't think it's a stretch to theorize that Gandalf may have intended to make use of the Eagles in some way or for some segment of the journey; but, as others have mentioned, there's just NO WAY a giant bird is going to (A) sneak into Mordor and, further, to Mount Doom (keep in mind that it's a good ways into Mordor, just look at any decent map), and (B) get to Mount Doom without any risk of losing the Ring to Sauron right there in his own kingdom. 

So, I can't believe the Eagle flying the Ring to Mordor would work at all, it's just not a viable option, but we don't know the entirety of Gandalf's original designs.
AnswerKenntnis:
Here is a variant on the "Eagles would take the Ring for their own" theory. It has been argued that since powerful beings like Gandalf and Aragorn accompanied Frodo for months without trying to seize the Ring, an Eagle could do the same for the short time it would take to fly from the borders of Mordor to Mount Doom. 

However the Ring has a will of its own. Tolkien makes it very clear that this is the case. For example, the Ring betrayed Isildur by slipping off his finger as he swam. Later, Gandalf observes that the Ring corrupted Gollum, but then abandoned him in order to escape from his cave under the Misty Mountains.

Now, let's take this concept and run with it. We can assume that the Ring's priorities are to survive and get back to Sauron. It can't understand spoken language, but it has some ability to sense the spirit world. Most of the time it is quite patient, for example spending several centuries with Gollum, but it can act more urgently if it so wishes.

During the journey of the Fellowship, the Ring was biding its time. It did not understand that it was in any particular danger. It may have been hoping to fall into the hands of Boromir, or some evil being such as an orc, the Balrog, or one of the Nazgul.

If someone takes it to the Cracks of Doom, the Ring is in a very different situation. It senses that it is in immediate danger of destruction, and will do whatever it can to survive. When Isildur first acquired it, Elrond advised him to throw it into the fire. Even though Isildur had only possessed it for a few minutes or hours, the Ring swayed his will and prevented him from destroying it. When Frodo approached the fire, he, too, was unable to bring himself to destroy the Ring. It was finally destroyed only because Gollum slipped and fell into the fire while holding it.

Now, suppose that an Eagle takes Frodo to Mount Doom. The Ring will exert all its power to save itself. It will call out to the Eagle, and there is a very good chance that the Eagle will answer, overpower Frodo, and seize the Ring for its own.

(Edit: As Frodo enters Mount Doom, it is mentioned that the Phial of Galadriel does not light his way, because all powers other than Sauron's are weakened. We can suppose that the Ring is correspondingly strengthened; although it is vulnerable there, it is also at its most powerful. This would make it more likely to be able to corrupt a nearby Eagle.)

I don't think this occurred to Tolkien. Otherwise, as the linked article points out, it would have been a good thing to mention at the Council of Elrond. But as a post hoc explanation for the plot hole, I think it makes sense within the rules of Tolkien's world.
AnswerKenntnis:
They are not his to give.  

Eagles are a race capable of their own actions and thoughts.
The Eagles are not middle-earth taxis.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why don't muggle-born wizards use Muggle technology to fight Death Eaters?
qn_description:
We know that wizards in Harry Potter universe are subject to regular physical harm (e.g. witness injuries from being hit by Bludgers or just colliding with things when playing Quidditch).

Therefore, it's almost a certainty that an average wizard would be vulnerable to, say, a bunch of bullets. 

There may likely be spell(s) to protect from projectiles - witness Dumbledore's shield deployed when Voldermort sent a bunch of glass at him during the Duel in the Ministry Atrium at the end of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (according to Wikia, possibly an unusually powerful Protego or the Silver shield). 

But:


those spells obviously take effort/energy/time to cast (not everyone's Dumbledore)
AND more likely than not most Death Eaters wouldn't recognize a Muggle gun for a threat (or realize what kind of threat) till too late.


So, the guns should at best allow an over-matched OotP member (e.g. Harry or Hermione) to greatly equalize the power between any regular Death Eaters and themselves, and even perhaps help against Voldermort (who can't be killed with a bullet, but, at best, would need to expend magical energy and time into conjuring a shield, and, at worst, be stopped/interrupted/driven off).

So I'm looking for an explanation - ideally in-universe, but possibly just some statement by JKR - of why the Muggle-born OotP - who are likely very much at ease AND familiar with Muggle technology and live in the late 20th century - do not use guns. Or, for that matter, ANY Muggle technology of the late 20th century? Cue Arthur C. Clarke's "indistinguishable from magic" meme.

Even if they are on some kind of idiotic moral crusade to never kill their opponents (even the Jedi aren't this dumb), given the time-frame, non-lethal weapons would have already existed, such as rubber bullets and tasers.

NOTE: Please don't offer the "if they do it, Death Eaters would start using guns as well" theory. First, Death Eaters would have used the guns if they knew how to, anyway. Second, the guns, like any "secret weapon", could be reserved for strategic battles, say the defense of Hogwarts in Deathly Hallows.



The origin of the question stems from two things.

First, Harry's fascination with all things that are different in the magical world (e.g. moving photographs), based on his knowledge of the Muggle material world, as well as the somewhat amusing cluelessness of the "Muggle artifacts" expert, Mr. Weasley, regarding Muggle items and how they work. 

Basically, from the books, it's clear that the Wizarding world wouldn't know details about guns or what they are for or how they work.

The second thing is it's clear, at least initially, that wizards are afraid of Muggles finding out about them. Hence all the efforts to cloak their society (basically, do you REALLY want every Muggle gunning for you, even with Magic)? The idea of how control over the Muggle world seems to be more indirect, by Death Eaters asserting mind-control over the government. This means there's an implicit understanding by Death Eaters that they don't stand a chance against armed Muggles even given the magical disparity.

Considering Harry and Hermione's overall adaptability and inventiveness (and brains in the latter case), it's mind-boggling that the idea of fighting Death Eaters with modern technology completely slipped their mind. I mean, it's a basic part of human myth (see Steel vs. Magic themes in Conan books, or Beowulf, or heck, A Yankee in King Arthur's Court). So it's not like the idea of using technology against magic would be impossible to come up with. The question begs itself - why not? Considering the fact that Rowling generally tried to be logical and consistent in building the HP universe, I feel like there must be some in-universe explanation for this that I just didn't notice. 

(in-universe answers only unless there's some authoritative out-of-universe statements that are part of canon).
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
I believe, though I've been unable to find a reference, that JK Rowling actually mentioned this at one point.

Part of the reason that the wizards hide is the fact that, if the Muggles so desired, the entire wizarding community could be wiped out by Muggle tech almost trivially.  Shields, teleportation, telekinesis, etc would fare poorly against an enemy who doesn't have to have line of sight, or make fancy motions, or incant faux-latin phrases.  If a special forces team had assaulted Hogwarts, instead of a group of Death Eaters, the castle would have been rubble and most of the population dead. (The special forces team would have suffered hideous casualties, of course, but only on egress)

The wizards, at least those who make decisions and laws, know this.  Everything about Hogwarts seems to be designed to separate wizards from Muggles, and muggle-borns from their roots.  I wouldn't be surprised if there was an area-affecting spell around the castle that encouraged the students away from thinking about Muggle solutions (similar to the ones that make Muggles avoid areas).

If one wizard had used an M60 to wipe out a group of Death Eaters, or even Big V himself (after he was rendered mortal, at least) wizards could not have failed to acknowledge this generally.  It would create a panic.  Suddenly, the Muggles, who most wizards seem to regard as half-blind, plodding simpletons, turn into a threat.  The mightiest wizards couldn't stand up to Big V, but a single piece of Muggle-tech could trivially kill him?  And there's BILLIONS of Muggles...it would terrify the wizarding population in a way Voldemort never could.

The combination of damaging Muggle-tech with the wizarding world could only destroy the entire wizarding world, and their leadership knows it (or knew it at one point, and created laws such that the separation would continue).
AnswerKenntnis:
A couple of reasons spring to mind.


Firstly, and most obviously, guns (as well as modern "Muggle" technologies like mobile phones and the Internet) just don't feature at all, because they're not relevant to the wizard-related part of the story. It would have totally ruined the immersion IMO if Ron had pulled out a Blackberry, or if Dudley had pulled out an M-16. It was a story about wizards, not a story about wizards vs Muggles, and I think completely ignoring most Muggle technologies is excusable from that point of view.
Another thing worth bearing in mind, is that the series is set in the UK. Guns, gun crime and shootings are FAR less common here in the UK, compared with the US. We had two massive headline gun incidents in the UK in 2010, and that was crazily unusual. It does become a small plot hole, but as a British reader reading stories set in Britain, I honestly didn't miss mentions of guns in the series.
AnswerKenntnis:
In order for Muggles to use weapons, a number of things would have to happen.


The Muggles would have to actually understand that there is a threat going on, which I don't think they really do.
The wizard would have to be caught unaware, so as to not cast any kind of a charm, or disapperate, when said bullets were fired.
The Death Eaters would have to stay in the area long enough for someone with a gun to arrive.
This encounter would need to occur in an area where there isn't an anti-muggle charm. Muggle technology doesn't function around Hogwarts, for instance, and I'm sure that there are other areas that have similar protection.
Most muggle technology (Ie, guns), could be stopped with minimal effort, if you could only reach into the right spot. I imagine a wizard could easily make the gun backfire, if they had any inklings to do so.


As for a wizard using a gun:


They would have to figure out how to accurately use the guns. You can't just take up a gun and shoot it. You need to have some serious work to hit the right point. 
They would have to seriously sneak up on the enemy. That takes even more skill
I suspect that if a wizard wanted to, they could just take a rock and accelerate it fast enough to simulate a bullet, without too much energy being used.
If a wizard had all 3 of the skills above (Or really only 2), they could just as easily kill them using magic. So why bother with the muggle technology?


I do believe that the wizards don't care much about the muggle world, they don't seem to mind controlling portions of it. I mean, if the army ever found out, they could probably kill some of them, but I imagine it's more of an annoyance thing than anything else. As it stands now, they could get away with almost anything.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think that the British cultural aversion to guns would apply in this case. In the US, most people can go into a store and purchase a gun and walk out with it that day. In England, one has to go through a lot more effort to legally obtain one, and the general preception towards gun owners in England is a lot more negative. Generally, British movies don't portray as much gun violence as American movies do, so the typical person "over there" won't tend to think as much about using guns (even if they were as readily available).
AnswerKenntnis:
First, it is explicitly stated that electronics don't work in areas with a lot of magic around. It helps explain why the wizards don't have the best of both worlds. Most of the gadgets Muggles would use in combat, from radios to nightvision, and even some weapons, would be rendered useless simply by there being so much magic around.

Second, it's implied in the books and outright shown in the movies that magic can manipulate Muggle devices, and Muggles themselves; Tom the bartender at the Leaky Cauldron silences a car alarm with a wave of his wand and some unknown nonverbal spell. If Alohomora can unlock a door that isn't magically sealed, then Locomotor could manipulate the action of a weapon, to jam it, make it backfire, or even stop the bullet in midair and redirect it to the shooter. Protego is a shield against most minor magical and physical attack, probably including bullets. Obliviate is not a slow spell to cast, even verbally. Neither is Stupefy or Sectumsempra. All three can render a Muggle combatant completely unable or unwilling to fight. Disillusionment can render a person invisible to all but the closest observer; Dumbledore can cast such a good one it rivals an invisibility cloak, and yes, wizards have those too. The Unforgivables could turn Muggle gunmen against each other or have them writhing on the ground in unspeakable agony, and yes, even kill them outright. If you think a Special Forces team would have any chance assaulting Hogwarts, you're sorely underestimating the weapons and defenses available to even a lone wizard; no wizard would even bother going toe-to-toe with a Muggle assailant.

Third, remember Muggles think magic is a complete fantasy. That's magic's greatest power against Muggles; we don't believe it. It's not explained in the prelude to Book 6 exactly how the Death Eaters destroy the bridge; in the movie of course it's a spectacle, but even then the Muggles might just have seen puffs of black smoke. Discounting magic as impossible, the Muggles would have instead come up with any other explanation they could, however implausible, because any other explanation would have been more plausible than to say it was "magic".
AnswerKenntnis:
Remember that highly-magical places, like Hogwarts, disable "technology" (Hermione mentioned that in... the fourth book I believe). Of course, guns are not electrical monsters, but I guess they just fell in the realm of "technology" anyway.
AnswerKenntnis:
After crunching through the series (finally) I couldn't help but wonder this. I mean, sure the Ministry of Magic (MoM from now on... seriously?) hides both sides from another (or tries it's best) and there is the effect of "muggles not seeing what the other things are doing" Not explained, but alright. 

Muggle tech is missing because, well: it'd break the lore. Completely. Why bother with avoiding and fighting the Death Eaters up close with yelling stuff and pointing sticks when you could be half a click away, love-tap 10 bad guys in the head inside a minute (considering how tightly they group and lack of common sense in vicinity of danger magical people seem to possess). As one said before: usually bullets are supersonic. You FEEL them before you hear them. And feeling a bullet is usually bad. And then again, this is about magic and the magical story of Mr. Potter, not Sergeant Potter. 

But, to go off the track a lot more because I think it's more interesting. Lets say the muggle governments, aware of magic and the possible dangers it poses. I mean, just snatch a random hoodlum or a very spirited and talkative student off Diagon Alley and get the intel. Or simply hire/recruit one or two disgruntled squibs (there has got to be a few of those around). You could get all sorts of intel. The threat of big V alone would warrant the creation and training of at least a platoon  (30-40 people) sized force specially trained to combat magical threats. Think FEAR operatives. Even a company sized (330-400 people) force isn't too out of whack. And they don't have to be muggle only. 
Adaptable is one thing we are, and I bet one schooled wizard per squad would be a must. There are magic users who think highly of muggles. So wizards who think more of muggles then magic users might not be common but I can bet they are there, and one thing governments are good at is finding these "undesirables". You don't even have to be negative about fellow wizards. 
Outcome? Think all the offensive and defensive spells wizards have, now add in firearms and muggle tactical combat training. Charm firearms to never run out of ammunition, be resistant (or even immune) to negative manipulation, or have other effects (armor piercing toxic explosive incendiary rounds, anyone?). hell give a week and one of those guys could probably whip up the gun from Supernaturals, except this one is a damn machinegun that never runs out of ammo, never jams, can fire under water and in space, never misses its mark and weighs about as much as a brick (any lighter and it'll probably become difficult then better to handle). 
And about muggle tech not working at all. Electrical stuff? Yes, I can buy that. But mechanical? No. Just. No. If a simple thing such as the cocking mechanism inside a firearm won't work, the hinges on the side of a chessboard would not work either. As for gunpowder? You got three times more complex and volatile chemicals going off in Hogwards on an hourly basis. 

So to cap it all up:
As a science fiction TV writer once said (kinda): "Just don't look at it too much. Accept that this is how it works." There is no proper in-lore explanation to why the wizards won't use muggle tech other than: "Just because they are prejudiced nitwits. And it would completely break everything." They don't know how it works because they never have to wonder about it. The concepts are alien to them because they live in an entire different universe. As for people like Hermione not figuring it out? She's been living in the same environment since she was, what 10? And her head being a veritable encyclopedia of various spells, potions and other know-what, I doubt there's much room for things like infantry tactics, electronic based communication networks and military grade combat equipment. I doubt that she (or anyone like her) would come in contact with these things or concepts in a day-to-day basis. And those that do probably don't care about the wizardly world. Even most muggles don't come in contact with these outside of computer games. And since wizards seem to be oblivious to the existence of computers... You catch my drift. 
This is the bane of every fantasy story in existence. They can never, ever live up to complete scrutiny of the "Why?" and "Why not?" questions. 

Why no muggle tech? Just because.
AnswerKenntnis:
Possibly - and I'm going out on a limb here - because it would have ruined the mystique of the story?

It's just a story, written in a certain style to create a specific atmosphere. 

Guns - non magical guns - would have ruined that atmosphere.
AnswerKenntnis:
(I think I've read all the answers and most of the comments, yet... Sorry if I'm duplicating anyone.)

Let's consider the question and its implications historically. Guns have been around for ages. However, magic and wizards have been around for way longer (remember, Hogwarts was founded around the 9-10th century.)

It is quite logical and safe to assume that any time in history, there were at least a few wizards (if not dedicated organizations) following the developments of the Muggle world rather closely, checking technological advancement and developing appropriate magical countermeasures for any possible threats. We can certainly also assume that such wizards were aware of the development and gradual refinement and empowerment of guns - and from modern day wizards' apparent non-reliance on guns, it seems to follow rather logically that they were highly successful in developing a countermeasure. So successful, in fact, that no wizard even thinks about using guns or minions armed with guns. 

As for what these anti-gun measures are, we can only guess, besides acknowledging their utter effectiveness. Maybe there's an "anti-gun" spell cast on any and all newly born wizards. Maybe there are area-protecting spells cast on most locations frequented by wizards. Maybe if you pull the trigger aimed at a wizard (or even a magical creature), your weapon backfires automatically. Maybe all the ammo in your weapon detonates, right in your hands. Maybe your gunpowder is exchanged for flour. Or dust. Who knows? What matters is that generations of wizards have grown up and learned not to give a damn about guns. Guns are not a threat to a wizard.

Also, sure there are spells protecting against projectiles, and there are attacks with projectiles. But... (and here's a question in my answer) ...are there any occasions on which the projectiles are not driven by magic, or launched by magical creatures, that is, on a higher level of abstraction, magic? (Pulling a trigger does not count as a magical launch, the bullet is driven by the blast, not the muscle power involved.)
AnswerKenntnis:
Also, I would note wizards seem, on some fundamental level, to be unable to comprehend technology, just as Muggles seem unable to comprehend magic.

Example 1 - Arthur Weasley, a man whose job was to prevent misuse by wizards of items created by Muggles, seems, thought the books, to be completely unable to understand how such items work--even though he's presumably been dealing with them for years, he can't even give the right names or terms.  Examples--the Car in "Chamber of Secrets", the Dursley's living room in "Goblet of Fire", and his lack of understanding of the term for plumbers in (I think) "Order of the Phoenix".  

Example 2--Kingsley Shacklebolt, in "Order of the Phoenix" was seen examining a dishwasher as if this was entirely new concept--and Kingsley was (1) smart, and (2) actually interacted with Muggles on a regular basis as part of the staff of the Prime Minister. 

Examples 3 and 4 - In the same scene in "Order of the Phoenix" Sturgis Podmore also was fascinated by the dishwasher, and Hestia Jones was seen giggling over a potato peeler--which is about the most self explanatory tool ever. Example 5--Daedelus Diggle,in "Order of the Phoenix" tells Mr. Dursley he felt he would be completely incapable of driving a car. Example 6--Ron has to use magic to pass his driving test in the epilogue to "Deathly Hallows" despite living with Hermione for more than a decade.

Coupled with the face technology didn't work at Hogwarts, and the possibility that this was true in other areas with high magical concentrations--such a wizarding villages--I suspect a wizard with a gun would be more dangerous to himself than to an opponent. This would also apply to eleven year olds raised in the muggle world like Lily Evans (Potter), Hermione, and Harry--immersed in the wizarding world, it appears that as they develop as wizards, they lose interest in the muggle world. I think, at 20, Harry would be fully capable of disposing of dark creatures by the truckload as an Auror, but likely baffled by cellphone. It may be that a mind trained to use magic simply cannot understand tech, and vice versa, no matter how intelligent - which, if true, solves the problem neatly, with only a few dangling issues.
AnswerKenntnis:
As some already pointed out, the answer is that muggle technology is not consistent with HP world..... with the latter unable to exist as it is with the former. In a real muggles-wizard shared world, there are 2 main points to consider. The 1st one is the old debate on which is stronger if magic or modern weapons, but to me it seems like Rowling herself gave away the answer. I mean, many here wrote something along the line of "the magician just have to wave his wand and poof, gunpowder is wet or bullets ricochet or whatever"; yet we saw all along the books how while magic can do -obviously- many unexplainable things the crazier the feat is, the stronger the magician has to be. Even just killing someone need a huge magic power according to the fake moody, and the duel between albus and voldemort is probably the highest level of destruction mages can reach. Were you impressed reading it? How strong must be the mage to cast a protego able to shield him from an assault rifle, which bullets can pierce normal walls? What about RPGs? Is the cloak spell able to hide your body heat too? What about the noise blast and the heat wave of explosions? Is Hogwart really able to hide itself from satellites, and if not what happen when a cruise missile (high tech) or a barrage of artillery (low tech) hit it? And so on... all points rised in forums everywhere. The ignorance of Mr. Weasley on muggle tech is a comic relief, but even the mere potential damage that a muggle bomb represent would at least ensure a Ministry of Magic department totally devoted to ensure both the ignorance of muggles about wizardry things and the constant research of ways to make muggle weapons ineffective against wizards. None of this appears in the books - its such a big plot hole that Rowling, comprehensibly, avoided it totally. Hp saga is a fairy tale after all, not a documentary on how wizards could actually live in a modern world.

The 2nd main point, way less used imho, is that in a real shared muggle-wizards world muggles would SURELY know about magic. Really, no way to deny that. From one side, scientifically speaking, magic seems to follow rules so its pretty reasonable to assume that a biologist could detect what make some herbs able to give X effect in a potion instead of Y, or which part of the brain a magician activate while casting or receiving spells, or overall the practical effects of magic in the real world. The wingardum leviosa deny gravity? Cool -  lets test it an a lab on some sensor-flled item and lets check whats really happening. And what about fossilized bones of magical animals, like centaurs or giants? What about mapping the dna of wizards, comparing them to muggles? Beside, the 
Weasley family prove you can be a wizard and relatively poor... how long would it take before a squid, who could at best be a janitor in Hogwarts and despised by purebloods while among magicians, decide to sell some magical artifacts in exchange of a boatload of muggle money or, if he just want to stay in the magical world, enough gold to buy an attic in front of the gringott bank and fill it with all he could desire? Come on.... And this would obviously create huge interest in the muggle world, huge push either to understand how magic works and replicate it or at worst, if that really was impossible (and nothing in the books suggest so, because the question is rightfully ignored) to bride every wizard they can offering gold, women, luxuries or whatever they want in exchange of their services? Besides we know the freaking prime minister of muggle is in contact with the minister of magic - even with the "no one would believe him" note, couldn't he at least fill his office with cameras? Even if they didn't work, a digital one would stop transmitting and that would be noted by the receiving pc. Etc etc etc.

Bottom line: muggles and their tech are ignored because they couldnt be inserted in the story without destroying it.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think it's a simple matter of familiarity. Mere handguns aren't really better than magic wands (which can do everything a handgun can and more). Most wizards, Muggle-born or otherwise, have far more familiarity and comfort with wands and magical spells than with guns. You really need to be a professional to use a gun well; I don't have the numbers at hand but even trained soldiers very rarely ever hit anything in combat when they shoot. It's unlikely a group of civilians would do better using weapons they aren't well acquainted with. Anything heavier than a handgun (like artillery pieces, mortars, bazookas) requires specialized training, which again a group of civilians would presumably not have. Far better to stick with what you know.

Think about it this way; in Star Wars, why do Jedi use lightsabers and the Force instead of blasters? And who usually wins in a fight between a single Jedi and a group of blaster-wielding fighters?

+1 Also to the bit about guns being less common in Britain. That's probably another factor.
AnswerKenntnis:
A really logical & acceptable in-universe explanation to why Harry & Hermione & OOTP doesnt use muggle technology, specifically Guns & knives is because they have never striked to kill, but only to incapacitate/captivate Death Eaters. Refer to that Restaurant scene in HP7.
The lowest common denominator of HP series has been love. Even though many close to Harry are killed in each of the seven parts, Harry never ever uses a killing curse. Even at the end, during his duel with Voldemort, Harry only strikes to disarm. Even after going through this ordeal for 17 years, he just cast Expelliarmus. I know it would look badass to whip out a gun in left hand & shout "Dodge This" with a smug face, but it wont go with HP's theme of LOVE. That is the best explanation to non use of lethal muggle weapons.  

Just to follow up some loopholes some might find in this answer, Harry casts Sectumsempra on Malfoy without knowing its use & is seen in very regretful phase after what happens to Malfoy. I am 99% certain that the only time a good wizard striked to kill was Mrs. Weasley on Bellatrix at the end of Deathley Hallows. She deserved it though.  

Just to add another POV, even muggle like Batman dont use guns. So, "Guns dont kill people. People kill people"
AnswerKenntnis:
I think the biggest thing to consider is the whole "technology not working around high magic areas" such as Hogwarts.  Is it simply a type if electrical interference OR is it that physics, the very thing that makes technology work, is being bent out of shape.

IF Physics is indeed being manipulated by magic, then I think it is safe to say that even an item as simple as a mousetrap may not function properly in highly magical areas. And therefore, an item slightly more complex (like a gun) would also lose its effectiveness. 

Another point I would like to address: Charms are preparation spells.  You preform them ahead of time.  You can charm an item so you don't have to repeatedly charm yourself.  So you could make a magically bulletproof jacket that even protects your head.
AnswerKenntnis:
There is more to acquiring guns than you think. Firstly, they'd have to be of age (18 or 21) to purchase a gun and then they'd have to be licensed to carry one (unless you're a criminal who acquires guns illegally). So during the second Voldemort war, Harry, Ron, and Hermione are all too young to have them, being only 17.

Harry and Hermione are adapting to the wizarding world of no guns, only wands, and so they probably never really thought about wizards using guns.
AnswerKenntnis:
Okay, Harry was born into the human/Muggle world. He knew about modern weapons. All he needed was a nice AR or an AK or any other semi-automatic rifle to take out any of the Death Eaters or Voldermort. A 5.56 round has a muzzle velocity of around 3100 fps. Most engagements were 50 yards or less. I don't care what silly word or spell you try -- you won't get it halfway out of your mouth before one of those 55-grain projectiles enters your brain bucket.
AnswerKenntnis:
My oh my There's so much I'dlike ot say, but I'll try ot keep it short and simple. OK Here it goes:


Muggle Born don't necessarily know how to acurately, efficietly and safely use a gun. As stated above they've been immersed in wizarding culture since their attending Hogwarts, they may return home to their parent in the muggle world During the Holidays, but it would be very easy to lose track of technological progess. The muggle world may seem unteresting,and boring.
They may come to thnik of guns  little more than a potentially dangerous piece of pyrotechnics... in the hands of a trained and experienced shooter.
Even if some of them knew how to use gun, owned a gun and brought it they would be too few to make a real difference. They're much better trained at using a wand that at firng a gun. Also there's casting a spell knowing you can just incapacitate or stun your target whereas a gun is meant to kill and to kill only. There's firing at a practice target on a shooting range and shooting at moving and living target. They're still just kids eventhough the events of the story must have changed them.
This is a series of books meant for children and/or teenager,the
main meassage of series is that love, trust friendship and all thing
warm and fuzzy deafeat evil, that violence fear anger are useless.
Reference to christ is present throughout the series, It begins with
Lily Potter's sacrifice, and it end with Harry walking to his death
ultimately leading to the defeat of evil."Do not pity the dead,
Harry. Pity the living, and, above all those who live without
love".This is all sacrificing yourself out of love for others,
altruism etc. So having kid and teenagers going badass and spaying
Death Eater with bullets just wouldn't do it.This is Jesus, not
Jeezus.
"Area of effect" weapon systems such as hand Grenades,be they explosive,smoke screen, or flash bang grenade, would be far more effective from  a tactical and strategical standpoint, no need to aim just need to pull the pin and throw in the general direction of the target and enjoy the show. My personal favourite? Chemical weapons, but let's be realistic in the best case scenario they would have acces  to pepper spray or tear gas grenades and "magic" bubble-head charm problem solved let's continue our merry mudblod slaughter party! The best course of action was to keep it simple and effcient and they did! Mandrakes and other magical plants animaterd armors, firing spells from the top of the towers. There must be oh somany way they defended the castle were  not told about...I would've loved to see booby traps or the centautrs charging...But the battle of Howarts was a secondary objective, the the  whole purpose of Holding Hogwarts was to Harry enough time,it was all a big diversion a ploy.
So why didn't they use muggle technology? they didn't need to, it would have made things unecessarily complicated, plus it was a totally improvised event,they didn't know Harry would come and there would be a battle.
AnswerKenntnis:
One point I found everyone missing is this:

In Order of the Phoenix, McGonagall rebukes Harry and George for "giving an exhibition of Muggle duelling" when they physically attack Draco after the first Quidditch match. On the other hand, wizard duelling is not usually rebuked for at Hogwarts unless there are serious casualties or security threats. I suppose here that Harry and George using guns (with rubber bullets) or pepper sprays against Draco would have provoked the same comment from McGonagall. 

Likewise, when Hermione punched Malfoy in Prisoner of Azkaban, he was not a weakling unable to return it, or at least attempt at it, especially given who his companions were. What is likely is that he thought too lowly of the Muggle way of his Muggle born opponent, but owing to it being effective and taking him in surprise, withdrew from the scene for the time being. And Hermione herself seem to have thought not much highly of herself as she was upset to the point of missing her Charms class (though there are other points to that as well) apparently of indignation.

In the Goblet of Fire, she was quick to dismiss Ron's idea of Harry summoning an Aqua-Lung from the nearest Muggle town for his second task with the pretext that it shall violate the Statute of Secrecy. She goes on later in the book to explain how "all the substitutes Muggles use for magic" fail to work at Hogwarts.

Even in a situation like that in Deathly Hallows when Ron returns to Harry and her, she looks for her wand after a brief moment of "punching every inch of him she could reach". 

These instances on the whole suggest that even a highly talented, yet self-respecting Muggle-born witch like Hermione took the Muggle ways of duelling and physical attack in general to be inferior and below their standards, and never went for Muggle solutions for their problems.

Wizards are known to use knives, swords, arrows etc. for combat, they being in use for ages, too traditional. It may be that they take pride in their old ways and equipment. For example, they still follow the dress code of the middle ages, irrespective of their blood status, a fact which has nothing to do with magic and moreover is a disadvantage that shows them off among Muggles.

If one adheres to the contention that wands actually fare better than guns too, in well prepared combats at least, the above is an in-universe explanation to why wizards, or Muggle-borns in particular, do not use Muggle technology in war.
AnswerKenntnis:
All other answers being great, I wanted to address one point:


  NOTE: Please don't offer the "if they do it, Death Eaters would start using guns as well" theory. First, Death Eaters would have used the guns if they knew how to, anyway. Second, the guns, like any "secret weapon", could be reserved for strategic battles, say the defense of Hogwarts in Deathly Hallows.


No, they wouldn't. Death Eaters are literally and figuratively nazis, formed with an ideology that pureblood Wizards should rule the world and halfbloods or muggleborns should be killed/subjugated along with all muggles and non-wizard creatures. They would not adapt muggle technology like guns any more than than a nazi would use yiddish to communicate. Regardless of how practical a gun would be over magic, their ideology would prevent them from accepting that, considering pure-blood magic to be the most powerful thing in nature.
AnswerKenntnis:
My opinion would be different, but bare fact is, that Harry Potter universe is meant for kids so there are simply no guns there.

IF we were to be more creative and imagine HP world as real, without the rules and restrictions of book for kids, situation would be different. Few clever muggle-born wizards would easily learn how to operate let's say AK-47 in a few weeks training. Same goes for basic land mines and C4-like explosives. Using their wizard skills they could enchant these weapons for use in areas like Hogwarts (to resist spells protecting the area from muggle-tech). If Order of the Phoenix started with training task-force like that first thing after learning that Nonose is still a threat, deatheaters would be probably shredded in subsequent clashes. It would be no problem for the Order to acquire muggle weaponry using magic, even in Britain. Just imagine Nonose and his homeboys standing there, about to destroy protective spells around Hogwarts, when someone inside fires fine aimed mortar...
QuestionKenntnis:
In what order should the Star Wars movies be watched?
qn_description:
Please don't lynch me, but I've never sat through an entire Star Wars film. I'm aware that the 3 (new) films are technically prequels, but I feel strange watching 3 new films then 3 old films?

Do I need to watch the new ones then the old ones?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
The best order IΓÇÖve seen suggested is as follows:




IV: A New Hope (original trilogy)
V: The Empire Strikes Back (original trilogy)
I: The Phantom Menace (prequel trilogy)
II: Attack of the Clones (prequel trilogy)
III: Revenge of the Sith (prequel trilogy)
VI: The Return of the Jedi (original trilogy)


Basically, you have a very extended flashback between episodes V and VI.

That puts the oldest and clunkiest SFX first, avoids spoiling the revelations from episode V, and finishes at the end of the story. And it means you wonΓÇÖt stop and give up in disgust after watching only one movie.
AnswerKenntnis:
I just read a very good blog post arguing that Machete Order is the best way to watch them:


  Next time you want to introduce someone to Star Wars for the first time, watch the films with them in this order: IV, V, II, III, VI.
  
  Notice something? Yeah, Episode I is gone.


The blog post itself goes into a lot more (persuasive) detail about why this is better, which I shall merely excerpt as:


  The Star Wars watching experience gets to start with the film that does the best job of establishing the Star Wars universe, Episode IV, and it ends with the most satisfying ending, Episode VI. It also starts the series off with the two strongest films, and allows you to never have to either start or end your viewing experience with a shitty movie. Two films of LukeΓÇÖs story, two films of AnakinΓÇÖs story, then a single film that intertwines and ends both stories.
  
  Beyond this, Episode I establishes Anakin as a cute little kid, totally innocent. But Episode II quickly establishes him as impulsive and power-hungry, which keeps his character consistent with [his eventual spoiler-containing destiny]. Obi-Wan never really seems to have any control over Anakin, struggling between treating him as a friend (their very first conversation together in Episode II) and treating him as an apprentice (their second conversation, with Padme). Anakin is never a carefree child yelling ΓÇ£yippeeΓÇ¥, heΓÇÖs a complex teenager nearly boiling over with rage in almost every scene. It makes much more sense for Anakin to have always been this way.


Rod Hilton goes on to explain what works best is the tension around Luke's destiny ΓÇö all the "will he, won't he?" in Episode VI:


   Having the very real threat of Luke following in his fatherΓÇÖs path made clear by watching II and III before VI heightens the tension of [Luke confronting the Emperor], and it actually makes Return of the Jedi better. Yes, watching Revenge of the Sith makes Return of the Jedi a better, more effective film. Considering itΓÇÖs the weakest of the original trilogy films, this improvement is welcome.


The one thing that becomes noticeably less good, Hilton caveats, is that


   Anakin returning to Tatooine


doesn't make much sense. We donΓÇÖt know 


  his mother is a slave, and we donΓÇÖt know he built C-3P0. When he has visions of his mother dying and returns, Watto says he sold her. ThatΓÇÖs not something you expect to hear about a JediΓÇÖs mother


, so itΓÇÖs a bit jarring.

I can definitely see the strength in this argument; I may have to try it out sometime soon.

And my favourite thing about the blog post has to be that it inspired this dude to suggest what Episode I should have been: What if Star Wars: Episode I was good?
AnswerKenntnis:
No.  Don't watch the new ones.  In fact, ignore them.  Just watch the old ones (A New Hope, Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi). 

See if you can find ones that have been unadulterated.  The originals were brilliant.  The recently released DvDs have been altered to retcon in stuff they screwed up in the prequels.  

Or you can watch the old ones and watch the prequels, but just be ready to be thoroughly disappointed by how very bad the prequels are in comparison to the originals.

Alternately, if you promise not to run screaming when you discover how much the prequels suck.  You can watch them in order and instead of disappointment, you may experience a certain level of gratification as they steadily get better.
AnswerKenntnis:
There is no "official" recommended viewing order for the Star Wars series, but there are two main approaches:


Watch the series in numerical (in-universe chronological) order (I, II, III, IV, V, VI)
Watch the series in release order (IV, V, VI, I, II, III)


My personal recommendation would be to watch the series in release order. That is, watch the original trilogy first, and then watch the prequel trilogy after that.
A number of factors weigh in on this decision.


There are revelations in Episode V (Empire Strikes Back) which will be spoiled if you watch the Prequel trilogy first.
The Original trilogy was made with very little knowledge of the story of the prequel trilogy, but the Prequels were made knowing the full story of the Original trilogy.
The Prequels were made to tell the back-story of characters
from the Original trilogy; rather than the Original trilogy telling the future of the characters in the Prequels.
The original trilogy developed a huge fan-base based
around it, but the prequel trilogy has been largely criticized by fans of the original trilogy.
Much of the appeal of the Prequel trilogy was the suspense of knowing how the chracters would end up, and finding how they got there.
AnswerKenntnis:
If you enjoy reading, there might be an even better way to enjoy it.


Watch Episode IV: A New Hope
Watch Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back
Read Shadows Of The Empire
Watch Episode VI: Return Of The Jedi
George never made any prequels...
AnswerKenntnis:
Don't watch the prequels- at least at first.  Let the weight of the first trilogy settle in before going to the prequels.

Watch Episodes 4, 5, and 6 first.  I'd suggest also watching three of the most popular original trilogy parodies- Spaceballs, Steve Oedekirk's "Thumb Wars", and the "Laugh it up, Fuzzball" Family Guy parody trilogy (Blue Harvest/Something Something Something Darkside/It's A Trap).  This will allow you to get a general idea about the cultural impact of the original trilogy before moving on.  

If you are still interested in what happened before "A New Hope", watch the Clone Wars animated series.  Don't expect Shakespeare from the animated series, and you may be pleasantly surprised by their content from time to time. "The Clone Wars" really helps in fleshing out the relationship between Obi-Wan and Anakin Skywalker.  Keep in mind that "The Clone Wars" refers to two separate series - a two dimensional series from 2003 and a 3D CGI series from 2008.  Technically, both of these series occur in the time between Episode II and Episode III, so you could watch Episode I and Episode II before each iteration of the Clone Wars series.

If you want, you can watch the prequels, once.  You may not ever want to watch the prequels again after that, and that's OK.  However, the Robot Chicken Star Wars Trilogy (I, II, and III)) does parody several of the moments from the prequel trilogy, so it would be best to wait to watch them until after you've finished watching I, II, and III.  Honestly, I enjoyed the Red Letter Media critiques of the prequels (I, II, III) more than I enjoyed the films themselves, because the critiques helped lend voice to the reasons that the prequels didn't have a lasting emotional impact on my life.  However, if you like the prequels, great!  Feel free to watch them as much as you want.  If you don't like them, consider watching a "fan-edit" version that may match up better to what you're looking for.

TL;DR - IV, V, VI, Spaceballs, "Thumb Wars", "Laugh it up, Fuzzball", I, II, Clone Wars (2003), Clone Wars (2008), III, Robot Chicken Star Wars I-III, Red Letter Media Critique of Episodes I-III, (Fan-Edits?).

EDIT:  I apologize for editing the answer several times.  If anything, the multiple edits of my own answer prove that there is definitely more than one way to watch Star Wars.
AnswerKenntnis:
Okay, I'm a little late here, but I would suggest the following: you start with IV, V, VI. That's the original trilogy and it will give you the guts to actually finish the whole marathon. Then go to I, II and III, so you watch them in order they were filmed and share the experience of all the people who watched them as they appeared. Now, the only downside to this approach is that you'll have the sense of unfinished story. Then you just go ahead and watch IV, V and VI once more, they are worth it and you'll complete the story in linear order.

So, IV, V, VI, I, II, III, IV, V, VI. It takes a little bit more time, but what the hell, you are going to rewatch the original trilogy anyway. Throw in Clone Wars series and movie between II and III if you like.
AnswerKenntnis:
Finnish MTV3 Order: III, II, I, V, IV, VI

When Finland's MTV3 channel (not related to MTV) acquired the rights in October 2008 to show all six films and The Clone Wars, they held a poll on their website to find the most popular. They received over 24,000 votes:


Star Wars: Episodi III - Sithin kosto (2005) (7926 votes)
Star Wars: Episodi II - Kloonien hy├╢kk├ñys (2002) (6974 votes)
Star Wars: Episodi I - Pime├ñ uhka (1999) (6337 votes)
Star Wars: Episodi V - Imperiumin vastaisku (1980) (5861 votes)
Star Wars: Episodi VI - Jedin paluu (1983) (4956 votes)
Star Wars: Episodi IV - Uusi toivo (1977) (4582 votes)


Somehow, the MTV3 schedulers decided that it must logically follow that the films should be shown the most popular first; that if the most voted for Revenge of the Sith as your favourite, then surely you also want to watch it first. And if Attack of the Clones is the next most popular, then show that second!

You can't argue with democracy: 24,000 people can't be wrong.

So episodes III and II were shown at Christmas 2008. Episodes I and V were shown in January 2009. They didn't show the last two until November 2009, and had finally decided (after showing III, II, I then V) it would be daft to show VI before IV and ignored the poll and sensibly switched them.


25.12.2008: Star Wars: Episode III - Revenge of the Sith (2005)
26.12.2008: Star Wars: Episode II - Attack of the Clones (2002)
17.01.2009: Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
31.01.2009: Star Wars: Episode V - The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
22.11.2009: Star Wars: Episode IV - A New Hope (1977)
29.11.2009: Star Wars: Episode VI - Return of the Jedi (1983)


(The following year they managed to show them weekly in numerical order.)
AnswerKenntnis:
Here's what I was told would be the best from a storytellers' point of view; of course I had watched the original trilogy from childhood long before the prequels came out, so there were no surprises left even in the new movies, but...


Watch Episode IV: A New Hope
Watch Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back
Watch Episode VI: Return of the Jedi up to where Luke sees Obi-Wan on Dagobah and Obi-wan explains himself.
Watch all three prequels in order, I, II and III
Return to Episode VI and watch the rest of it.


Now, the original story arch of Star Wars was supposed to be a "trilogy of trilogies"; A New Hope was chosen as the original release because if Lucas didn't get backing for the rest of the films, Star Wars was the best one to stand alone. The third trilogy, which was supposed to take place after the original trilogy, will probably never be seen in movie format. Between all the fanfics and the Star Wars: Jedi Knight video game series, the basic idea is that there are still Imperialists "insurgents" making trouble, Luke is rebuilding the Jedi Knights, and nature abhors a vacuum; there can be no light without darkness.
AnswerKenntnis:
I know this is a long time after the original question, but in lieu of the recent blog post http://scifi.blogoverflow.com/2011/10/scifi-stackexchange-in-practical-use-in-what-order-should-the-star-wars-movies-be-watched/ I would like to propose a slightly different order:


  4 - 1 - 2 - 3 - 5 - 6


See the Rebel Alliance and fall in love with the rebel ideals, and be confused and hurt by the fierce and uncaring Empire, then go back and see how the not one generation before the rebels were the ones that became the Empire, then watch Anakin grow old, get married, have his wife die, the children were hidden, now he and Luke get reacquainted, and then the finale.

Just my suggested order.
AnswerKenntnis:
After posting this answer I tried it out and think that this order works rather well. Think of the symbolic similarity between the two Skywalker generations, both starting out in Tatooine:


  IV, I, II, V, III, VI


Try it! The flashbacks and flashforwards work rather well, without spoiling the suspense until the right time.


(IV) Meet an innocent Luke in a backwater planet learning about his family connection to major events in recent galactic history. Learn how evil the current Empire is.
(I) Flash-back to meet an innocent Anakin in the same backwater planet, and see how idyllic the Republic was supposed to be. Connect the two story lines via Obi-Wan. There is that mysterious bad guy in the cloak.
(II) The Republic is breaking. Anakin is becoming the jedi master Obi-Wan told Luke about. The Clone Wars (which he also mentioned) begin.
(V) Flash-forward! The New Republic is fighting the Empire in earnest. Yoda is still around. The cloak guy is now the Emperor. Vader did not kill Anakin... He is Anakin!
(III) So what happened? Palpatine was supposed to be a good guy, but he is the cloak guy! Anakin dissolves into Vader (so technically Obi-Wan told Luke the truth). Now we know why Yoda had to go into hiding.
(VI) Return to the backwater planet to reunite Luke's crew, and get ready to strike down the Empire once and for all in a conclusion that brings two generations together.
QuestionKenntnis:
Are E.T. and Star Wars in the same universe?
qn_description:
An answer about the Star Wars timeline, uses the appearance of E.T.-like creatures in the Star Wars universe as a frame of reference for dating the sagas relative to our present day.

I remember noticing, and discussing the E.T.-like creatures when I saw the film, too, but is there an in-universe explanation for this, or an in-universe tying of the two stories?  

Or is it just a cute Hollywood nod on the part of Star Wars to the E.T. franchise?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
TL;DR answer: Yes. As a gag/easter egg/cross-merchandizing/friendly jest/whatever, Spielberg and Lucas have placed enough canon information in their universes to imply
that E.T. really is an alien from a species in a Star Wars Galaxy.



The two directors (Spielberg and Lucas) went to film school together (Where they made THX 1138).  Since they knew each other and have worked together in the past it is also very plausible they collaborated with each other about E.T. being part of Star Wars.  



E.T.'s species were officially called The Children of the Green Planet, their planet was called Brodo Asogi



Background on the cross-over history:


  The Children of the Green Planet are a cameo appearance of the famous aliens of Steven Spielberg's 1982 film E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial. These creatures were inserted in the movie to make good on a promiseΓÇöafter Steven Spielberg included a Yoda cameo and Star Wars toys in E.T., George Lucas promised to include an E.T. cameo in the next Star Wars film he made ΓÇö The Phantom Menace. 


Note: in this answer, any quotes are from Wikia article linked above, slightly reworded and improved.



Main Link #1: Visual evidence:

This is what ET looks like: 

 

In "Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace", in the Galactic Senate, we see the image of the senators from Brogo Asogi (not named in the movie) - who look 100% like E.T:





Main Link #2: Species/planet name:


"E.T.: The Book of the Green Planet" (a book from E.T. franchise which is the sequel to movie's novelization) mentions on page 19 that Brodo Asogi was one of many names given to E.T.'s homeworld, all of which translate to "Green Planet", and "Children of the Green Planet" to be the translated name of E.T.'s species. 
In Star Wars Universe, the same homeworld name is given to the species in Cloak of Deception book (but the species name is not specified).
The species is named in HoloNet News Vol. 531 50 which mentions Senator Grebleips* of Brodo Asogi.




Other links:

First, the "easter egg - Star Wars in ET" that started the whole crossover:


  When E.T. goes trick-or-treating with the children, he spots a child in a Yoda mask and begins to follow that child saying "HomeΓÇª homeΓÇª" (Composer John Williams included a snippet of his "Yoda Theme" from The Empire Strikes Back to accompany this scene.). This could be interpreted as E.T. recognizing a familiar species from his home galaxy. 


Additional SW links to ET:


  HoloNet News Vol. 531 50 also mentions that Senator Grebleips of Brodo Asogi funded an expedition to another galaxy. This is another reference to E.T., since E.T. visits Earth from another galaxy in the film.
  
  Pat Welsh, the woman who did the voice for E.T. in E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, also did the voice for the bounty hunter Boushh in Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi. 


*Several people have made mention of the fact that 'Grebleips' is 'Spielberg' spelled backwards, as another related easter-egg.
AnswerKenntnis:
To expand upon DVK's excellent answer, I have found a source that confirms that the species shown in TPM are, in fact, the same species as in E.T.: an interview with George Lucas himself (emphasis mine):


  A greeting and suggestion from Denmark. In The Phantom Menace, there
  is a cameo appearance in one of the senate chamber boxes, by some of
  the E.T.'s. As in Steven Spielberg's E.T.: The Extraterrestrial movie.
  Since they must be an established race in the Star Wars universe,
  there wouldn't be anything wrong in having them in another cameo
  role(s), either in the new Star Wars TV series or in future films.
  With Spielberg's acceptance, of course. Since they are a race devoted
  to science and exploration, they could easily fit into the known Star
  Wars universe.
  
  ...
  
  George Lucas: The problem is that the E.T. design is owned by
  Universal Studios. Steven and Universal let me show the E.T.'s for a
  fraction of a second, but we wouldn't actually ever use them in one of
  the upcoming Star Wars TV shows or the future films. We have plenty of
  new types of aliens to reveal and don't need to give any further
  screen time to E.T.'s species.
AnswerKenntnis:
The evidence for ET and Star Wars sharing a universe is far from conclusive.

Going by strictly canon material from the movies, all we have is a picture of aliens that resemble ET from the waist up, which DVK provided a picture of.

We don't know that they resemble ET in full or that even if they do, they are in fact the same species. It would be easy to mistake a Centari for example for a Human.

Most of the evidence for them being in the same universe comes from the extended universe or non-canon work. For example, Senator Grebleips funding a trip to another galaxy does not necessarily have anything to do with the trip made by ET.

There are enough points there that you can link things together and draw a somewhat reasonable conclusion that ET and Star Wars may share a universe.

On the other hand, a clear example of a mask of Yoda is seen in E.T. This could void any theory on sharing a universe, but could also simply be an easter egg to help viewers make the connection.



This means that any similarities between ET and an alien race in the Star Wars galaxy is just a coincidence. Star Wars is firmly fiction within the ET universe, so cannot by definition share the same universe.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why did Douglas Adams pick 42 as the ultimate answer?
qn_description:
Star Trek often refers to 47 and Star Trek made a sport out of finding real or imagined references to 47. Why did Douglas Adams pick 42 as the ultimate answer in the Hitchhikers guide to the galaxy?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
According to Douglas Adams himself:


  The answer to this is very simple. It was a joke. It had to be a number, an ordinary, smallish number, and I chose that one. Binary representations, base thirteen, Tibetan monks are all complete nonsense. I sat at my desk, stared into the garden and thought '42 will do'. I typed it out. End of story.


Source: Wikipedia article
AnswerKenntnis:
Narrator: There is a theory which states that if ever anyone discovers exactly what the Universe is for and why it is here, it will instantly disappear and be replaced by something even more bizarre and inexplicable.
  There is another theory which states that this has already happened.  


according to The Original Hitchhiker Radio Scripts, 1985

I prefer not the test the other theory, therefore I refuse to answer your question.
AnswerKenntnis:
On a day when he was less tired of the question than when he gave the quote in @GoranJovicΓÇÖs answer, Douglas Adams went into more detail about how he chose 42:


  I wanted a nice, ordinary number, one that you wouldnΓÇÖt mind taking home and introducing to your parents.
  
  http://www.independent.co.uk/news/yes-the-answer-to-the-universe-really-is-42-1351201.html


The joke, like much of AdamsΓÇÖ humour, aims for bathos (ΓÇ£an abrupt, unintended transition in style from the exalted to the commonplaceΓÇ¥), so the number has to be utterly ordinary, to contrast with the grandiose idea of a meaning to existence.

HereΓÇÖs an extract from M. J. SimpsonΓÇÖs Douglas Adams biography (on a Procul Harum fan site, of all places) that discusses his thought process in more detail:


  What is the most ordinary, workaday number you can find? I donΓÇÖt want fractions on the end of it. I donΓÇÖt even want it to be a prime number. And I guess it mustnΓÇÖt even be an odd number. There is something slightly more reassuring about even numbers. So I just wanted an ordinary, workaday number, and chose 42.
  
  http://procolharum.com/dadams-simpson_biog2.htm


Personally, I think the rhythm of the syllables, and the soporific ΓÇ£orΓÇ¥ sound in ΓÇ¥fortyΓÇ¥, help to create the ΓÇ£workadayΓÇ¥ quality. Forty-two, dum-de-dum. It sounds frumpy.

Also, the second digit (2) is half of the first digit (4) and has half the syllables, which I think adds to the sense of quiet anticlimax.
QuestionKenntnis:
Did Tolkien really explicitly consider Sam the true hero of LOTR?
qn_description:
Quoting from Crouching Moron Hidden Badass: Literature on TVTropes (TVTropes link alert!!! Don't tell me I didn't warn you!):


  Perhaps even more aptly: Samwise Gamgee. His name roughly translates to "halfwit", and it applies. He's overweight, easily frightened, and not very bright. He also beat a man-eating giant spider demi-god in single combat, single-handedly stormed a tower full of hostile orcs to save his friend's life, was the only Ringbearer to steadfastly resist the temptation of the One Ring, and literally carried another man up the side of a volcano for the fate of the world while starving and suffering from dehydration. There's a reason Tolkien considered him the true hero of the story. 


I am wondering if there is an actual direct confirmation (in-Universe or out-of-Universe quote from Tolkien) that the statement "There's a reason Tolkien considered him the true hero of the story" is true.

Please note that I'm not looking for a logical proof, e.g. not something based on general "this is a work about common folk defending themselves etc. etc. etc.." general chain of reasoning.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
In a letter to Milton Waldman (so-called Letter 131), Tolkien makes mention of Sam being the "chief hero" of the story [1]:


  I think the simple 'rustic' love of Sam and his Rosie (nowhere elaborated) is absolutely essential to the study of his (the chief hero's) character, and to the theme of the relation of ordinary life (breathing, eating, working, begetting) and quests, sacrifice, causes, and the 'longing for Elves', and sheer beauty.


He also makes mention of Sam's heroic nature in a reply to a real-life Sam Gamgee (so-called Letter 184):


  It was very kind of you to write. You can imagine my astonishment, when I saw your signature! I can only say, for your comfort I hope, that the 'Sam Gamgee' of my story is a most heroic character, now widely beloved by many readers, even though his origins are rustic.


Elsewhere, in a letter to his son Christopher (so-called Letter 91), he begins:


  Here is a small consignment of 'The Ring': the last two chapters that have been written, and the end of the Fourth Book of that great Romance, in which you will see that, as is all too easy, I have got the hero into such a fix that not even an author will be able to extricate him without labour and difficulty. Lewis was moved almost to tears by the last chapter. All the same, I chiefly want to hear what you think, as for a long time now I have written with you most in mind.


The last two chapters of the "Fourth Book" refer to the end of The Two Towers [2]: in the last two chaptersΓÇö"Shelob's Lair" and "The Choices of Master Samwise"ΓÇöonly two characters are present: Frodo and Sam. The latter chapter, aptly named, is told exclusively through the narrative of Sam.



Notes

Note 1 In the comments, user8114 mentions that it's Aragorn to whom Tolkien is referring to as "the chief hero" in the excerpt above. And indeed, Aragorn is mentioned prominently in the paragraph that surrounds the excerpt. But the context does not support this hypothesis.

Letter 131 is an attempt to justify the themes and motifs to his friend and potential publisher, Milton Waldman, against comments regarding the marketability of The Lord of the Rings. The excerpt above regarding Sam, his Rosie, and "the chief hero's character" is in the middle of a long paragraph on the love stories present in the work:


  Since we now try to deal with 'ordinary life', springing up ever unquenched under the trample of world policies and events, there are love-stories touched in, or love in different modes, wholly absent from The Hobbit. But the highest love-story, that of Aragorn and Arwen Elrond's daughter is only alluded to as a known thing. It is told elsewhere in a short tale. Of Aragorn and Arwen Und├│miel. I think the simple 'rustic' love of Sam and his Rosie (nowhere elaborated) is absolutely essential to the study of his (the chief hero's) character, and to the theme of the relation of ordinary life (breathing, eating, working, begetting) and quests, sacrifice, causes, and the 'longing for Elves', and sheer beauty. But I will say no more, nor defend the theme of mistaken love seen in Eowyn and her first love for Aragorn. I do not feel much can now be done to heal the faults of this large and much-embracing tale ΓÇô or to make it 'publishable', if it is not so now.


Here, Tolkien enumerates three love stories:


Aragorn and Arwen
Sam and Rosie
Eowyn's unrequited love for Aragorn


The first story he points out is only mentioned and left alone for another story. The second he emphasizes as being important to understanding the chief hero's story. The third he intentionally takes off the table for discussion.

Looking at the specific sentence mentioning Sam, there are two uses of the pronoun "his": first to "his Rosie" and then, 9 words later, to "his character". Tolkien, being a scholar of the English language, would not first refer to Sam, thenΓÇöin mid-sentenceΓÇöchange the referent to Aragorn for five words, then back to Sam to describe his qualities as exemplars of the "ordinary life".

Additionally, if Aragorn were the chief hero, it seems reasonable he would've made one of the two love stories involving him essential to understanding his character, instead of brushing them aside in favor of Sam's love story with Rosie.

And, given his repeated and consistent emphasis on Hobbits, not Men or Elves or Dwarves or Ents, being the heroes of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, Aragorn is not a fit: he's merely someone by which to compare the plights of the Hobbits, much like Gimli and Legolas.

It should also be noted, as the redditor richlaw pointed out, Christopher Tolkien himself believed his father meant Sam was the chief hero, not Aragorn. Wayne Hammond and Christina ScullΓÇöcreators of the index for the published Letters of J.R.R. TolkienΓÇöaddressed this concern on the Lord of the Rings Fanatics Forum, where they explained they wrote to Christopher Tolkien asking for clarification regarding the passage in Letter 131:


  To this Christopher replied, very succinctly, that he was certain that 'the chief hero' referred to Sam.




Note 2 The Lord of the Rings was published in three volumes with two books each; The Two Towers contains books 3 and 4. Later in the same letter, Tolkien discusses how to get out of the hole he dug himself in books 5 and 6 (i.e., The Return of the King).
QuestionKenntnis:
Story where the number 3 is the monster?
qn_description:
I remember as a child reading a story where the narrator was a little boy and how he was scared only twice a day ΓÇô when the clock read 3:33. The 3's would be powerful enough (there were three of them at 3:33) to leave the clock in the boy's room for one minute and do what they want. They terrified the boy for that one minute they were free.  

I don't think it was R.L. Stine, but I cannot remember the author. I know it was only a 15-20 page story, so maybe it was in a short story collection.

I would love to read the story again if anyone else knows of it and its origin.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
It is from a Japanese cartoon called "Nine".
AnswerKenntnis:
Isn't it connected with the Exorcism of Emily Rose film? 3 o'clock as well. But this film was shot quite recently, not 15 years ago.
QuestionKenntnis:
Is the basic premise of humans as a power source in The Matrix reasonable?
qn_description:
In The Matrix the machines "grow" humans to provide a source of power. Is this really feasible from the perspective of power generation (never mind all the business of growing/feeding people)? Wouldn't the machines just use nuclear power?

Edit: For what it's worth, in the movie Morpheus explains that the human power is "combined with a form of fusion."
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Yeah, this isn't feasible.  Humans produce heat and radiate heat, but not so much that you could really harness it for power.  It wouldn't be at all efficient given the necessary inputs of food and water.  The nuclear power would be far more practical.

So, no, the machines wouldn't use humans for power.  It makes no sense.

For those who require more explanation: humans produce their energy from food, primarily glucose.  However, the majority of that energy produced does not go to releasing heat.  The heat is an afterthought, part of maintaining homeostasis to allow for the most efficient biological reactions.  Most of the energy goes into powering our cells so that they reproduce, make proteins, power our brain, etc.  

Attempting power generation by harvesting human heat is ridiculously inefficient.  You'd be infinitely better off just burning the glucose.

And this isn't taking into account all the other foods and nutrients we need to stay healthy that have nothing to do with us generating heat.
AnswerKenntnis:
By Eliezer Yudkowsky


  MORPHEUS: For the longest time, I
  wouldn't believe it. But then I saw
  the fields with my own eyes, watched
  them liquefy the dead so they could be
  fed intravenously to the living -
  
  NEO (politely): Excuse me, please.
  
  MORPHEUS: Yes, Neo?
  
  NEO: I've kept quiet for as long as I
  could, but I feel a certain need to
  speak up at this point. The human body
  is the most inefficient source of
  energy you could possibly imagine. The
  efficiency of a power plant at
  converting thermal energy into
  electricity decreases as you run the
  turbines at lower temperatures. If you
  had any sort of food humans could eat,
  it would be more efficient to burn it
  in a furnace than feed it to humans.
  And now you're telling me that their
  food is the bodies of the dead, fed to
  the living? Haven't you ever heard of
  the laws of thermodynamics?
  
  MORPHEUS: Where did you hear about the
  laws of thermodynamics, Neo?
  
  NEO: Anyone who's made it past one
  science class in high school ought to
  know about the laws of thermodynamics!
  
  MORPHEUS: Where did you go to high
  school, Neo?
  
  (Pause.)
  
  NEO: ...in the Matrix.
  
  MORPHEUS: The machines tell elegant
  lies.
  
  (Pause.)
  
  NEO (in a small voice): Could I please
  have a real physics textbook?
  
  MORPHEUS: There is no such thing, Neo.
  The universe doesn't run on math.
AnswerKenntnis:
This was a big issue with The Matrix, but in light of The Animatrix, I have an alternate theory: The machines don't really want to eliminate humans, just to be safe from them.  This is consistent with their creation of the machine nation (which humanity destroyed) and their actions in the movies.

They want humans to exist, but they want to exist as well.  Since it's been demonstrated that coexistence fails, they logically decided that imprisoning humanity was the most efficient way to allow the humans to live without threatening the machines.

My guess would be that the immense power generation setup was part of a double-blind: they knew some humans would be free of the matrix (as the architect explains) but they needed some visible reason to keep humans around (reasonable enough that the humans would not search for other reasons).  So they likely try to use the human batteries as the primary power source for the matrix (supplementing it with their standard power sources, as it would be insufficient by itself).

In short, the machines did it in part to reduce the cost of keeping humans alive, and to prevent the inevitable freed humans from railing against the machine's primary civilization and culture.
AnswerKenntnis:
It is surely pointless. Much more energy could be harvested by simply burning the nutrients that are fed to the humans - actually even more energy could be harvested by not producing the nutrients and using the energy saved elsewhere.

In fact, humans only radiate heat as a byproduct - because they keep their temperature constant - and so they are really inefficient heat engines.

Also, in the movie, humans are kept alive in a soup. Now, what is the temperature of that soup? Does it need to be heated in order to keep the humans alive? Well, the energy cost of keeping the soup warm is actually way more than you could extract from the humans!
AnswerKenntnis:
There already are several devices that can derive power from external sources. (Energy Harvesting methods) The ones that could possibly be used to extract energy from humans held in pods are mainly : 


Thermoelectrics : Which are currently able output about 40┬╡W.
Bio Fuel Cells : Capable of producing 100┬╡W. 


These technologies still have a lot of room for improvement, but for arguments sake let's assume 50┬╡W and 100┬╡W respectively.

Let's say the outfit each individual with 10 of these Energy Harvesters.

Resulting in 1500┬╡W per person.

Assuming there are 5 billion people being kept at all times. [4]

This would result in a power output of 7.5 Mega Watts, while not nearly enough this is just using today's technology which presumably will be a lot more developed in the future. 

So even though there are definitely more efficient ways of producing energy, it might be feasible if the technology is sufficiently mature.

EDIT: 

An average person needs about 2000 calories a day (Food Energy), which translates to roughly 0.1 Watt.
As stated earlier each person only outputs about 1.5 milliwatt.
AnswerKenntnis:
As much as I enjoyed The Matrix, this was the most silly premise of the movie. As stated before, I could understand using humans as an organic computation source, but there's just not that much energy outputted from a human body, especially when there's much better sources that we see in the film... lightning, winds, and even their drilling tech could have been used for geothermal energy.
AnswerKenntnis:
The  Second law of thermodynamics  states any system will run to entropy over time, i.e unless there is some new input of heat or information at a very fundamental level to sustain the system and restore order. For the matrix films, the assumption is made that the human are acting as a power source, where the output is greater than the input. That breaks the second law. Also the assumption is made (implicitly I think, It's not really discussed at any length) that humans are essentially a derivation of a know fallacy, namely perpetual motion machines. These have never proven to exist, or can exist, because they would break the second law. 

But hey, it's a cool film. Enjoy.  And today, Keanu Reeves announced 4 and 5 are in development.
AnswerKenntnis:
A few alternatives they could have used that would make sense:


Raise a tower to space for a) solar power, b) harness sky voltage, c)harness energy from lighting discharge, d) harness energy from layer of electrostatic interference surrounding the earth
Dig down to the core for geothermal energy
AnswerKenntnis:
Humans could not possibly be a viable fuel source. The sugar, proteins, and lipids that would be required to raise a human to adulthood like in the movie would need to come originally from plants. Plants use light energy from the sun to produce sugar through photosynthesis. The idea that the machines would convert heat and electricity from fusion into light to produce sugar to feed humans to harness heat and electricity is absurd.

The idea of using the human brains as nodes in a giant matrix is interesting. I believe there is more than enough processing power there to support the virtual reality and expand on the machines processing power. Even more interesting to me is the parallel between this story and Issac Asimov's rules of robotics. Perhaps the machines never eliminated the humans because they can't. Perhaps they believe they are in fact doing the humans a favor. Keeping us safe from ourselves. 

As a scientist, I am deeply bothered by the notion of an entire movie being based on such an absurd premise. We must all remember, however, that if the future machine overlords do in fact eradicate human kind (as they certainly would) then movies like the matrix and terminator don't get made in the first place. These movies are compelling but why? Because at the heart of them is the notion that faced with an overwhelming common enemy we would stop fighting ourselves and work together.
AnswerKenntnis:
It is not reasonable. Neither is sending people back in time to kill them. Dreaming inside a dream making your brain run 10x faster for each level is also not reasonable. I think the 'reason' part is that the story writer hoped it would freak movie goers out to think of the human race as a power supply for machines. It's along the same lines as zombies needing to eat brains. Freak-out factor +100, real-world physics -100.
AnswerKenntnis:
I have read a theory that machines are using "unused part of human brain" to control nuclear fusion -- the second part seems reasonable, but first of all, there is no such thing as "unused part of the brain" and probably the computational power required to run matrix itself is way higher than this needed to control fusion.
The other option is that machines are using human intuition or clairvoyance skills, but this is also a fantasy.
AnswerKenntnis:
The short story "Goliath" included on the Matrix website and in the Matrix Comics (Volume 1) indicates that in addition to using humans as batteries, they're also being using people's brains as secondary computer processors and memory storage.


  ""What's going on?" I asked. "Do you know?"
  
  "Enemy missile took out a central processing unit," he [the Agent]
  said. "Two hundred thousand people, hooked up in parallel, blown to
  dead meat ... You're just free-floating here for a couple of
  nanoseconds, while we get London processing again."


A full text can be found here.

Since the machines are obliged to keep the humans alive, it makes perfect sense to attempt to use them as a power source. Morpheus makes it clear that it's not just the BTUs produced by the human occupants but also a novel form of fusion that produces the power.
AnswerKenntnis:
As, it is clear from @M.K.'s answer, power generation is not possible from human body. However, I think there are other questions raised by your question that need to be addressed:

Why would machines leave humans alive? is there any other reason apart from being a power source why humans would be left alive by machines?

Ans.  The machines are not so Idiotic as to ignore creatures as ours selves that have the capabilities of learning, sensing and creating, just by killing them. They would certainly invest a lot of their resources in understanding us and how we function. They might be looking for processing power too from human brains as suggested by @RoguePlanetoid in his comment. No matter how you look at it, Human race would be much more valuable to the machines alive, than dead.
AnswerKenntnis:
It would be for a short time, if the machines did their work efficiently enough.

They'd have to have minimal (negligible) costs for Liquifying, Growing, Transporting, Simulating the Matrix for human beings.

The machines are perfect computers, so maybe they could do that. Then you'd be left with a very rapidly declining population, as energy is wasted in humans by radiating heat, moving (and thinking) and the inefficiency of digestion.

As the machines are perfect computers, yes they might have found they could extract energy this way for a couple of years. Someone do the math to find out how long precisely.

The machines would somehow have to have a reason for not being more efficient about all this biomatter, as surely the overhead is not better than having a customized biomachine do the processing.
AnswerKenntnis:
Alright we know it's less efficient than other sources but in the machine world the sky has been blocked out so natural food sources don't exist and you need energy to produce more. When the uprising began, it was a way to control and use the humans at the same time en masse since there were probably 10 million or more in this future  and the life span of the human in this condition provides a stable source of power. I'm sure a machine by logic would choose to put them to use for what little power they could, rather than to just kill. How do we know they did not have other resources at hand?
AnswerKenntnis:
other answers are good but do not take into account a certain striking highly legitimate/relevant scientific angle, have long noted the following but never seen anyone else point it out. 

thermodynamics and physics are certainly relevant/useful/compelling concepts to analyze this question (and the robotics in the movie tends to steer thinking/interpretations in this direction) but in some ways misleading. there is a key concept from biology that is highly relevant:

Parasitology!

in other words, in stark specifics, to mix biological and technological metaphors [but exactly as the movie does], a model for the movie is that its a bizarre robotic-human parasite interface, where the human race is the host and the robotic race is the parasite "species". this interface sounds weird but it is also the basis of the theory of "cybernetics" aka termed by one "the marriage of man and machine" (and related to the origins of the word cyberspace).

a relatively new book on this subject by Zimmer, Parasite Rex,[1] documents how there has recently been a real/total Kuhnian paradigm shift (mass/systematized rethinking) in biology on this subject. parasites are now known to alter the behavior of their host in key ways. the parasite extracts energy from its host but not in so much an obvious way but in an indirect way (eg parasite feeding off host blood, which houses stored energy). also up to a staggering 3/5ths of all species on earth have parasitic aspects, that is, it is the basic mechanism (of life/energy extraction) employed by the majority of life on earth.

so far it is not thought that many parasites are "designed/optimized" (evolved) to focus primarily on human hosts [ie we believe we are at the "top of the food chain" as the saying goes], but one certainly wonders! a semi scientifically plausible candidate is as follows! the parasite toxoplasma gondii is estimated to infect up to ~30% of the entire human population. (and how much does this ~2.5B host count compare to its other hosts, cats and rats?) 

it cannot reproduce sexually in the human host but it can reproduce asexuallly in humans!  toxoplasma can be transmitted vertically from pregnant mother to child!
t.gondii is thought to be mostly dormant in the human, although it is now documented to alter human behavior. it is implicated as a linked factor in schizophrenia. scientists admit that there is much unknown about t.gondii & overall study of it is in many ways still in early stages.

another striking example/video of a parasite controlling the behavior of a insect host, the fungus parasite in rain forests, and thereby extracting energy almost as if the host is its battery.[2]

and yet another key element that no other answers point out: human slavery has existed for countless millenia, probably as long as humanity has, and slavery persists to this day around the world. the most simple analogy is that the robotic species has enslaved the human race. slavery is once again an indirect harnessing of energy of one individual by another. of course there are also strong parallels between parasites and slavery such that parasites are said to enslave their hosts in almost all senses of the word. 

even in western civilization slavery is thought to be banished, but a more subtle but very similar form of wage slavery is extremely widespread and at record levels as revealed through statistics on economic inequality. these are somewhat more abstract analogies, but the economic system is an energy system and slavery is a harnessing/extraction of energy through the economic realm.

[1] Parasite Rex: Inside the bizarre world of nature's most dangerous creatures

[2] Absurd Creature of the Week: The Zombie Ant and the Fungus That Controls Its Mind
AnswerKenntnis:
The factual answer is absolutely!


  E=mc^2
  
  For a 70 kilogram adult, you're talking 6.3 ├ù 1018 joules by E=mc2.
  
  That's 6├ù1015 btu, or 1.7├ù1012 kilowatt-hours.


That is enough energy to power the entire US for 16 years (which is way more efficient that nuclear power. The problem with this is that we currently have no way of accessing or harnessing this power. It is not unreasonable to assume that machines sophisticated enough to create the matrix in the 1st place would have solved this energy access problem.

Considering that the original question is,"Is the basic premise of of humans as a power source in The Matrix reasonable?"  Not asking how or why the machines used humans as a power source. The answer is yes, every form matter in the universe contains energy which can be converted into power.
QuestionKenntnis:
Could the Enterprise beam a vampire into a house she didnΓÇÖt have permission to enter?
qn_description:
There's this article on io9.com asking this exact question, and I thought that scifi.SE would be the ultimate place to have the matter settled. I present to you:


  This is a serious question that has been bothering me. We all know that in most vampire lore, a vampire cannot enter a house without an invitation. It's like an unbreakable barrier. But what would happen if you used a transporter, like on the U.S.S. Enterprise, to beam a vampire inside a house, uninvited?


(Mentioned on Google+ here and here.)
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Although vampires don't exist in the Star Trek Universe, Star Trek does exist in the Buffy Universe, so I'll vote for this as a reasonable question :-)

In Buffy, a vampire attempting to enter a home to which he has no invite simply hits an invisible and impenetrable barrier. Since the Enterprise crew do on occasions find they cannot transport people because of various barriers - force fields, even on occasions extreme weather conditions on alien planets - I think it's all but certain that that is exactly what would happen if they tried to transport a vampire.
AnswerKenntnis:
I imagine that the effects of a vampire being inside a house without an invitation vary depending on the literature you read.  I'm going to pose a theory based on the True Blood series.

In the True Blood series, any time a vampire has had their invitation revoked while they are inside a house, they are forced to leave.  While the only scenes I've seen seem to have the vampire involuntarily speed-walk themselves out, I think a more unnatural force could take effect if the vampire either could not move themselves or attempted to fight the removal.

Regardless, it is evident (based on the series we're going with here) that a vampire can in fact be in a dwelling uninvited for a very short time - just long enough to be removed.

So, pairing that with transporter technology, here's my theory:

The vampire would transport in normally, but upon final materialization they would be forcibly expunged from the house via the nearest exit.  Or, if a "nearest exit" does not exist, they would probably end up "making one" on their way out.
AnswerKenntnis:
Vampires are usually documented not to appear in mirrors, and often not even to cast a shadow.  Given that level of non-interaction with basic physics, I suspect this paradox could never happen simply because the transporter could never get a lock on a vampire, period.
AnswerKenntnis:
The concept of a 'threshold' is used in The Dresden Files to explain why supernatural forces can't enter a home uninvited: it acts as a supernatural barrier.  Creatures with a physical body (demons, wizards, etc) can enter uninvited, but it takes a minor physical effort to do so.  They also leave the majority of their power at the door.  Dresden, who is among the top 40 wizards in the world in terms of raw power can't summon enough to light a candle if he's not invited in.  Creatures without a physical body (AND vampires) cannot cross this.  This includes creatures of the NeverNever, ghosts, etc.

In book 13 (Ghost Story) we learn definitively that if you cross into a home or building from the NeverNever, you maintain your full power (though you can't re-enter uninvited if you leave).

Therefore, it stands to reason that if you were transported behind a threshold using a Star Trek style teleporter in the Dresden Universe, you would have your full power and be able to act freely.
AnswerKenntnis:
If vampires existed in the Star Trek universe, and the same weakness of the not entering a house without being invited were also in-universe, I imagine that the transport operator wouldn't be able to recognize the pattern of the vampire to begin with.

If they COULD send it through the pattern buffer, then I wouldn't imagine that they could get a location lock inside the house as the pattern in the buffer wouldn't be able to pass through the barrier.

Again, this is all speculation as vampires don't exist in the Star Trek universe (yet).
AnswerKenntnis:
I imagine the practical in universe(es!) answer is that the beaming would fail by some unexplained technical difficulties and the vampire would have a nice aha moment and say "I have not been invited into that house..." That would certainly be appealing to writers, for the nice dramatic effect; and could go into that whole "three trials for the hero" sort of writing. 

Depends on your favorite vampire series/novel. Sometimes they are ousted, sometimes they cannot by any physics be allowed in (hence the beaming failure), and some literature (dare I say lore) also suggests the vampire will begin to die or bleed to death.

This is all taking for granted vampires exist in Star Trek; which isn't really out of the question. Some holodeck/Q intervention could easily be a plot device to allow this sort of oddness. Also early on there was an episode of Next Generation where the Enterprise entered a location in space where "time and space and thought" were all connected. Something like this would allow for vampires as well.
AnswerKenntnis:
Interesting.

Evidently, the teleportation technologies in Star Trek (at least in ToS) strictly work harmoniously to manipulate matter (and antimatter; see 'The Naked Time').

That said, if a typical vampire is made of atoms (the type of atoms we're familiar with), then it is logical to assume a vampire can be beamed into the house without a problem.  

Staying in the house remains a dubious issue, nonetheless.
AnswerKenntnis:
Well, based off of several transporter scenes in which a person was only partially materialized into the transporter room, or into the chosen destination I would have to think that an uninvited Vampire would be only partially materialize inside the house before the computer realized that it could not in fact reassemble the vampire at this location; this would presumably cause one of two results. 1) The Vampire would be reassembled back in the transporter room in tact. or 2)If through some technical issue (which I believe has happened at least once though I can't site an episode), or the lack of computer protocol for the Vampire being "uninvited", would cause the Vampire to be atomically lost in space / time and essentially die, unless through some outside action such as Q, the Vampire's essence could be saved.

As for the house being transported onto the Vampire in some fashion...  since the Vampire was not trying to enter the house uninvited but rather the house was trying to enter the Vampire uninvited :) i would say the rule would not apply, and the house would need to make a hasty apology and exit, possibly offering the Vampire a warm bed for the night. :)
AnswerKenntnis:
I like the approach in Let the Right One In (and similarly, the U.S. remake Let Me In and in the one of Being Human), where a vampire is physically able to enter uninvited, but will soon perish if they do not leave fairly quickly.

So beaming in would represent no difficulty, but you'd want to leave pretty quick.
AnswerKenntnis:
If the transporter can transport the vampire at all, then it can absolutely put the vampire in the house uninvited. The vampire would be obliged to exit post-haste.

Now what if there was a planet to which the vampire wasn't invited. Would the vampire have to jump into extraordinarily low orbit?
AnswerKenntnis:
At the heart of this paradox is the problem of not knowing how in detail the transporter works, or how a vampire not being able to go into a house without being invited works. The lack of details on the functioning of either of these makes speculation difficult.

So it would seem that one of two possibilities may happen depending on the practicalities. Firstly, if the force that prevents vampires entering houses is strong enough to prevent the initial transporter lock into the house, then the transporting process would fail. Having said that, it is not clear to me the precise parameters of the permission--how long does it last, does it have to be renewed if the building is changed, or changes hands? So if this was rigorous enough, the transporter may detect this problem, and be able to report it back.

However, the other side may be that the transporter can lock on sufficiently, and start the transport, if a certain amount of the vampire needs to be present before it takes hold, then the transport would start but may falter when enough vampire its present to experience the rejection. This is liable to disrupt the transport, I would think, although the entire vampire may manage to arrive before experiencing the rejection. I think a vampire would be very brave to try this.
AnswerKenntnis:
If in-universe rules of The Vampire Diaries are valid, the answer is YES.

Once, an original vampire (named Elijah) was temporarily killed and his body was kept (successfully) in a house for which he wasn't allowed. When he became alive again, he started to suffocate. His body failed to function correctly. Overall, he wasn't feeling comfortable in the house until he rushed & exited the house.

So, Enterprise can beam down a vampire in a house he/she don't have permission to enter. But, just after materialization, he/she would start suffocating & wouldn't feel comfortable. The vampire would need to exit the house to function correctly.
AnswerKenntnis:
Vampires in various lore are 'turned' all the time in houses that they weren't necessarily invited into while humans.  A minor point. 
The General Rule is, a vampire cannot physically enter a house it's not invited into.


Now, despite its name, a Transporter does not so much move living creatures, as it actually 
disintegrates the object, takes the data about the quantum make-up of the object, and then rebuilds it at a specific location.

So, the Transport'ed vampire is actually created in this house.  As newly-turned vampires don't 'historically' get immediately expelled from houses they were turned in as soon as they regain consciousness as a new vampire (not every vampire is created in a forest), one cannot expect a newly quantum-level-rebuilt Cold One to get magically evicted.

Summary: Transporter recreates physical structure of vampire at the spot.  Vampire doesn't actually, definitively enter the beam-location premises.  Vampires thrive on technicalities and work-arounds.
AnswerKenntnis:
It would depend entirely upon the canonical rules of magic under which the vampire exists.

For example, under the Dresden rules, magic and technology don't mix. The transporter would probably fry or explode the instant that it tried to lock up any magical item/being. So there would be no way to force the paradox to occur.

In many of the media based series (Buffy, Moonlight), vampires who are in a home and have their "entry privileges" revoked are summarily ejected (not necessarily safely). In some of these universes, a similar type of ejection would probably take place. In others, the "tainted" molecules would not be allowed to enter the house and the transport would probably just fail (transporters being designed to fail gracefully so as not to allow people to die - that being considered a sub-optimal outcome and likely a matter for government regulation and/or investigation).
AnswerKenntnis:
Since "Let the Right One In," a Swedish film, hasn't been mentioned yet, and I think it's relevant, I'll take a stab at this.

In the film in question, a vampire in the form of a 12-year-old girl befriends a boy of similar age.  He decides to see what happens if he doesn't invite her in, and so deliberately refuses the invitation.  She enters anyway, and immediately begins to hemorrhage from her orifices (and possibly her skin, I don't recall).  The bleeding ceases immediately upon the extension of an invitation.

So, in this universe, the Enterprise could likely beam a vampire into any home, but there would be a mess afterwards.
AnswerKenntnis:
While I doubt the common vampire rules apply, I would like to point out that Star Trek has at least one creature that could be considered a vampire.  It's even been nicknamed the Salt Vampire - the species' original name is unknown.

In TOS 1x05, The Man Trap, it successfully snuck aboard the Enterprise through the transporter beam, by posing as another crewman.
AnswerKenntnis:
I would think a transporter would transport all the matter it could lock onto, but not any "magical" parts of the vampire. You would simply get a lifeless corpse appearing in the target house which would promptly collapse to the floor before starting to decompose.

Transporting involves scanning, converting to energy and then reconstructing. Since the scanners would only see a dead body, only a dead body would be reconstructed. The vampires essence would remain on the ship in the transporter room and probably try to possess someone.
AnswerKenntnis:
As people have already mentioned it would depend on the lore of the Vampire you take. 

For example in "Being Human" (UK version), a Vampire being trapped in a house they were no longer invited to would cause them to die if they were unable to leave.
QuestionKenntnis:
Does Batman use Linux?
qn_description:
While reading about a Windows 8.1 tips & tricks blog, I came across this conversation in the comment section where they were joking about the possibility of Linux being Batcomputer's choice of OS. Could it be true? A customized OS perhaps? Could the utility belt be running Java? I've searched for an answer which yielded nothing but some vague description of it being a supercomputer and that was it!
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
I've found one in-universe and one out-of-universe instance of Batman using an actual computer (e.g. as opposed to a Hollywood computer with customised graphic interface) 

1960's Batman

The 1960s Batman series used a modified Burroughs Corporation B205.



The Batcomputer in that case was running the CTOS/BTOS Operation System.

Comicbook Version - 1990s

The panel below shows that the BatComputer uses seven Cray T932 "plug-in units" to provide backup processing power. 



In order to interface with his own BatComputer, Batman must be quite proficient in using Cray's own unix-based operating system; UNICOS
AnswerKenntnis:
Expanding on the answer of @jrg and @Richard, I think we can safely assume that we should consider the question as referring to times beginning from 1980s, since that's UNIX systems actually appeared on the wide user/corporate market. Obviously neither *n*x OS was an option earlier than this rough date due to movie/comix readers/watchers (not to mention creative staff's) perception of the whole computer science; we got mainly blinkenlichten in movies from pre-1980 era due to little recognition of actual computer operating systems' looks.

To sum up:

a) Since we can assume Batcomputer was a mainframe during 1980-1990 era, it's highly probable it was shipped with some custom UNIX clone, however it is not unheard of entirely machine-specific systems, especially with high-end machines. He certainly hasn't used Linux during that time, because Linux hasn't been created by Torvalds yet.

b) Beginning with ca. 1995, Batman used T932, a most powerful variant of T90 supercomputer, running UNICOS, which is in turn based on UNIX ("CRAY T90 systems run Cray Research's industry-leading UNICOS operating system based on UNIX system V"); we can safely consider he ended doing so somewhere about 2005, when it was obsoleted by Cray X1; thus he most probably wasn't using Linux for this time (even though Linux already existed).



c) Batman's Wayne Enterprise Mainframe (which is, most probably, used as the Batcomputer, since most of Batstuff is actually disguised as actual corporate property one or another) uses *n*x OS currently; see




Wayne Enterprise Mainframe:~ en$ nmap -v 192.168.23.10


with

username:path$


being the common command prompt of e.g. bash shell.

Since custom *n*x OSes are ATM the usual choice for supercomputers nowadays, mainly due to maintainability and security provided, it's quite obvious Batman would choose one for his Batcomputer. Hard to say if it's Linux or Unix/BSD clone due to lack of data - but saying it's a Unix-like OS is quite a good guess IMO.

(as as side note, I'd also assume it's a custom-tailored, highly personalized distribution - mostly because that's the way a power admin would go with his personal mainframe)
AnswerKenntnis:
However, Batman does use nmap (bottom of the page).

 (click to zoom).

Therefore, it is entirely likely and possible that he uses a Linux distro of some sort.
QuestionKenntnis:
Was the Millennium Falcon too slow?
qn_description:
I've always been puzzled by the speeds of space craft in Star Wars. The Millennium Falcon was said to travel at "point 5 past light" - which I guess is 1.5c:


  HAN: She'll make point five beyond the speed of light. She may not look like much, but she's got it where it counts, kid. I've added some special modifications myself.


And it was said by Han Solo to be the fastest ship in the fleet.


  HAN: Look. I want you to take her. I mean it. Take her. You need all the help you can get. She's the fastest ship in the fleet.


But at that speed it will take years to travel between solar systems.

Is this a mistake in the Star Wars universe?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Yes.  This is a mistake in the Star Wars universe.  George Lucas had no understanding of space travel or physics.  Which is why his starfighters swoop about the way World War II fighter planes did.  

In modern explanation the "past lightspeed" bit has been retconned away.  Instead there are the hyperdrive classes with a reverse scale.  The higher the number the slower the ship.  So a Class 1 hyperdrive is one of the fastest, but the Millennium Falcon has a 0.5 class hyperdrive.  Twice as fast as a Class 1.  Just how fast a Class 1 is is never really explained.  

Though if you really want to go into it, get some of the roleplaying books.  They'll have charts for travel between star systems (and possibly distances).  You may be able to figure out how fast a class 1 is supposed to be from that.  

More information: http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Hyperdrive

[edit] Okay this is a ridiculously rough calculation.  I went and pulled out my old WEG RPG book and looked at the space travel section.  It didn't have a map or distances or anything -- one of them does, but I don't have the time to find it now -- but it did make this statement:


  Even with a well traveled hyperspace
  route the fastest ships, such as the
  Millennium Falcon, would take several
  months to traverse the whole diameter
  of the galaxy.


Elsewhere the Galaxy was quoted as being 120,000 light years in diameter.  Using this we can make a really rough guess at how fast the Falcon is, and from that, what the classes really mean.  So we'll assume "several" is 6 months.  Using that we can find that a class 1/2 hyperdrive would travel at about 28 light years per hour.  So a class one's speed is about 14 light years per hour.  

I'll find that map and do a better one later.  I'll note that the book does say that well traveled hyperspace routes, such as trade routes, can take significantly less time than less traveled routes.  Why that would be, I dunno, but it hints that there is more going on to hyperspace than simply traveling faster than light. [/edit]
AnswerKenntnis:
I thought that comparing how fast a ship gets from point A to point B in the Star Wars universe was determined by how good their navi-computer was. (Not sure if I have the term navi-computer right. By that, I mean an computer for navigation (or astrogation if you like that term better).)

Apparently hyperspace has a vast network of routes and the better the navi-computer, the more efficient a route it took through hyperspace thus getting the ship to its destination faster.

I'm sure velocity is also important though. It seems to me the Millenium Falcon always seemed to be slower than pursuing star destroyers until it jumped to hyperspace.  In the "A New Hope" Luke is alarmed at the rate the imperial cruisers were gaining on them as they fled Mos Eisley, for example.  Even though in the Cantina Han Solo claims to have outrun imperial ships. (Not the local bulk cruisers, but the big Corellian ships ... just to clarify which ones.... :) )

To answer the question, I like to think the Falcon was a fast ship. Han Solo and Lando Calrisian seemed to think so, although every one else seemed to have never heard of it (Obi-Wan), thought it was a piece of junk (Luke), and offered to get out and push (Leia). I guess it depends on your point of view. (After all many of the truths we cling to depend greatly on our point of view....)

So I guess this is a pretty good question that is sure to offer many different perspectives!
AnswerKenntnis:
Star Wars uses a reverse scale. The lower the rating, the faster the ship. 0.5 is 2x as fast as an Imperial warship. The scale is asymptotic, with 0.0 being infinite speed, and higher numbers being slower. The next fastest ship is Boba Fett's Slave I, which had a class 0.7 hyperdrive.
AnswerKenntnis:
I've a strong dislike for the kind of EU retconning on display here - it can have a tendency to make something which was a confusing enough mess to begin with even more confusing and even messier.  The script didn't say "0.5", it said "point five".

Let's assume that there's a scale of speeds beyond the speed of light.  The Falcon is on the fifth point of that scale.  It needn't be more complex than that.
AnswerKenntnis:
What most people fail to realize is that when making a movie, it is entirely possible that travel times between, say, Tatooine and Alderaan (or the Death Star, as it were in the fourth when Han made the comment referenced above) were much longer than they appeared in actual screen time. You don't question it when a movie skips over a plane trip over the Atlantic, even though that takes several hours. So maybe the Falcon did take a month or two to get from Tatooine to Alderaan and we just were not shown it. Now by all accounts I doubt it takes 6 months to cross the galaxy, probably more like 2 or three. Otherwise the timing would be very off on most of these events, but you do have to realize that Obi-Wan taught Luke a god bit about the force and a lightsaber on that first trip on the Falcon. So it's safe to assume that the travel speeds of the Falcon are more like 40-45 times the speed of light. This means that a class 1 hyperdrive probably goes about 20-25 and a class 4 more like 8-12. Still not as instant as shown in the movies, but that's just Hollywood for ya. 

Also I would like to point out that these speeds put Star Wars warship speeds on a par with that of ships from other sci-fi series, such as the mass effect cores in Mass Effect (minus the use of mass relays) and the hyperdrives of the Stargate series.
QuestionKenntnis:
Are all Stormtroopers as poor soldiers as the ones in the movies?
qn_description:
In the Star Wars films we consistently witness just how poor soldiers stormtroopers are. They show very sub-par marksmanship, crappy house searching tactics, and are easily fooled and defeated by Ewoks and Rebels. 

That being said, I remember reading a character guide that defined Stormtroopers as the very best of the best (best marksman, above average intelligence, etc.). So, in the realm of the Expanded Universe, does the mold that the movies set continue to hold true or are they just the exceptions to the rule?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Stormtroopers are not poor soldiers.  Let's consider the situations in which they find themselves:

A New Hope: Stormtroopers led by Vader seize a Blockade Runner, suffering some losses. Soldiers on Tatooine are susceptible to Force Persuasion, and are slow to break out the big guns to stop a freighter from escaping. Stormtroopers on the Death Star show poor accuracy and tactics during their pursuit of the main cast.  Many seem to be killed or wounded, and very few even come CLOSE to hitting the good guys.

Empire Strikes Back: Snowtroopers overrun prepared defenses at the Rebel base.  The Rebels are routed and flee.  Later, Stormtroopers escort Vader on Cloud City, essentially do nothing...except for completely (and virtually invisibly) taking over the entire security.

Return of the Jedi: Storm and Scout troopers guard the forest moon of Endor.  A covert strike team supported by the indigenous peoples of the moon assault the base and destroy it.

Taking these in order, then:

ANH: During the boarding action at the start of the movie, the Stormtroopers assault a ship.  Despite the defenders using cover and being aware of their entry point, they suffer only minor losses and quickly seize control of the ship.

The Stormtroopers on Tatooine are most likely part of the local constabulary, not regular army units - their training is sub-par, they have gotten into a routine, and they are trying to add additional duties on top of their standard ones - they're expected to monitor traffic into and out of a city the size of Mos Eisley.  When it does all hit the fan, they respond with respectable speed to uncertain information (a single non-human informant, who likely was paid well for his trouble).

After the Death Star escape, Leia says it herself: "It was too easy.  They let us get away."  The Stormtroopers harried the main cast during their entire retreat to the ship.  They continued operating under their orders (including the order to not kill the pilot or princess, to ensure that they escaped to the Rebel base) even while taking casualties.  At one point in the chase, after Luke sees Obi-wan struck down, Stormtroopers are seen carefully aiming, and each shot misses, even as they are picked off.  They show remarkable devotion to their duty by staying cool under fire, shooting to miss, and ignoring their natural desires for vengeance against the ones who are hurting their friends and colleagues.

ESB: Nothing to see, here.  Stormtroopers doing what they do.  They assault and overrun fixed, prepared defenses with such speed that they are able to cut off the internal security and overrun the base far quicker than the Rebels expected.  They do this DESPITE the way their heavy artillery is hampered by the Rebel air forces.

Later, at cloud city, they seized control to the point where normal operations were not interrupted, the common persons had no idea of their presence, and maintained it.  As pointed out by Mark in the comments, they did this with virtually NO prep time.  So being able to flawlessly seize control of what is effectively a space station (best parallel I can come up with, despite it being technically in atmosphere), and hold it effectively indefinitely, maintain discretion even after inadvertent discovery is an application of their standard training, since they were able to do it from a standing start.

RotJ: This is the situation where the Stormtroopers are worst portrayed.  In the jungle, they are unable to prevent the destruction of the shield emitter.

Their loss, however, is mitigated by several factors, many of which can be traced back to the Emperor himself:


They aren't issued proper equipment
for their surroundings.  They have
shining white armor in a jungle.
They do not properly prepare their
defenses - there are no 'kill zones'
around the base itself, which any
military would prepare in an area of
dense foliage.
They are forced to
allow the covert group to initially
succeed, while the Emperor works on
Luke.


Now let's consider their opposition: the Ewoks.  Yes, they seem silly.  They're tiny little teddy bears, they were created for marketing purposes, and not nearly enough of them were shown dying.  But from an in-universe perspective, really think about what we see.  These little, curious, cute fuzzballs are completely psychotic.  They volunteer in HUGE numbers to assault beings who have godlike powers (comparatively), they know the area well, they've been observing their enemies for a long time.  And they're strong as hell.  Ewoks are seen effortlessly lifting boulders the size of their torsos and throwing them.  While it's obvious that the 'boulders' were props made of styrofoam, from an in-universe point of view, we must assume they were rock.

I don't care HOW good your armor is, the kinetic force of that much rock, at that velocity, will knock you silly.  And what happens when you find yourself on your ass, concussed, surrounded by primitive creatures with the strength to rend you limb-from-limb?  We should be glad for the artful cuts the movie makes.

I could go on, but this has already been long enough in the typing.

In short, the times when we see Stormtroopers 'sucking' are all times when their hands have been tied by politics, overarching military strategy, or their superiors incompetence.

The times we see them doing their jobs without such problems, they perform exceedingly well.
AnswerKenntnis:
No, they're worse.

Those represent, according to Palpatine, who should know : "an entire legion of my best troops"


  "As is your Rebel fleet! It was I who
  allowed the Alliance to know the
  location of the shield generator. It
  is quite safe from your pitiful little
  band. An entire legion of my best
  troops awaits them."


We can assume the rest are worse than those on Endor.

Per Obi Wan, we can also assume sandpeople are possibly the worst of all :


  "These blast points - too accurate
  for sandpeople. Only Imperial
  Stormtroopers are so precise"
AnswerKenntnis:
On the one hand this is such lazy writing as to be a common trope, sometimes called the principle of evil marksmanship - basically they can't be any good, as the heroes have to constantly be close to being caught/shot and yet always get away.

I think the problem might be universal though - hardly anyone in the universe can shoot straight. Just look at Greedo not being able to hit someone across the table (though I'd debate that Han shot first).

Given all the standard problems with projectile weapons on spaceships maybe blasters are a sucky but cheap and reliable alternative?
AnswerKenntnis:
For RotJ, Ewoks/Rebels = Vietcong, Empire = USA (The Empire).  Or Ewoks = American Colonials, Empire = Brits.  Or Ewoks = Afghans, Empire = Russia.  The relatively poorly armed guerilla fighters often have an advantage over the larger invaders.
AnswerKenntnis:
The reason for the discrepancy (one of them) was:


Orginal STs were exclusively clones of Jango Fett. The officers were specially grown/brainwashed to be more independent/better combatants
By ANH, only 1/3 of stormtroopers are Fett clones. Most are normal human crap^H^H^H^Hrecruits.
By ROTJ, even more.
AnswerKenntnis:
The best example of just how poor stormtroopers comes from comparing the Lucas approved stats in the various RPG's between Stormtroopers and the Heroes.

In WEG's Star Wars the RPG, a Stormtrooper is as good as normal people get... 


  Stormtrooper
  Str 2D (3D for damage purposes)
  __ Brawling 3D
  Dex 2D (reduced to 1D by armor)
  __ Blaster 4D (reduced to 3D by armor)
  __ Brawling Parry 4D (reduced to 3D by armor)
  __ Dodge 4D (reduced to 3D by armor)
  Kno 2D
  Per 2D
  Tech 2D
  Mech 2D
  WEG Star Wars 1E, page 103


Note that 4D is actually pretty decent, with 2D as average human stats, 3D as average starting PC stats, noting that starting human player characters can have up to 4D in an attribute, and Han Solo's blaster skill is 9D... 

They are, like almost all villain's armies, dangerous not particularly for skill, but for sheer numbers. 

In the current FFG Star Wars, the attribute scale is 1-6, with humans normally having 2 as the minimum, and almost no PC's having 6's; no starting PC can start with a 6 as yet. Skills run 0-5.

THe Stormtrooper is Brawn 3, Agility 3, other attributes 2's, no skills, 5 WT (versus 10 base) 5 armor counting 2 points of laminate. Effective skill of a group is a single attack with an effective skill of (Number in group firing together)-1.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the first three episodes the Stromtroopers are brand new and fresh. So back then they were excellent troopers since they're all clones from Jango Fett(the best bounty hunter). 

However, 20 years later in the sequels, a lot of them had to be replaced with standard personal. So, although, the best may be on Endor, overall they would be average.
AnswerKenntnis:
It is noteworthy that stormtroopers are portrayed to be far more competent in the Expanded Universe. Even though the old standards somemtimes crumble, crack troops still exist and are superior to most comparable units in the galaxy.

Off the top of my head I remember Timothy Zahn's SurvivorΓÇÖs Quest and Allegiance to be particularly good examples. In both books, we get to see action from the stormtroopers' point of view.
QuestionKenntnis:
Was Yoda fully sane on Dagobah?
qn_description:
Our (and Luke's) original impression of Yoda is by no means flattering. He looks like a crazy hungry green thing that unfortunately has the ability to speak. Yoda digs through Luke's stuff, eats Luke's food, and, obsessed with that awesome little flashlight, ends up stealing it. (He even goes so far as to fight with Artoo over it.)

So was Yoda slowly losing it during all those years as a hermit?

Perhaps going from fighting battles and conversing with others on a daily basis to living in total isolation with no one to speak with would play a part in that? Or could Yoda have been faking his apparent insanity for some reason? (If so, what is mentioned reason?)
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
He was:


Pretending to be the nutty old harmless thing so Luke would not know who he was.
See Obfuscating Stupidity.
The reasons were:


He didn't want to teach Luke (being wary of another Skywalker Reversal) due to Luke having similar problems to Anakin (started too late, wrong personality traits, Skywalker Curse, and excessive Midichloran count meaning that the downside of Luke falling to Dark Side was that much higher).
He didn't know if he could risk the info that he was Yoda the Jedi Master to fall into Luke's hands yet.
Luke not knowing who he was helped him test Luke by observing Luke in "natural" state (e.g. NOT the state of Luke talking to great Jedi Master).

In addition, that behavior was testing Luke (e.g. would he react with violence to stealing of flashlight or food? How would he react to having his patience tested by seeing this nutcase when he's in a rush to find Jedi Master?).

This is not just a logical speculation, but is confirmed in C-Canon:


  Yoda had also given Luke a hard time at that encounter. It had been a test of Luke's patience and of his treatment of strangers. And Luke had flunked it. Rather miserably. (Dark Force Rising, Timothy Zahn)



Also, as far as behaving in weird manner, it's a standard archetype/trope for a Quirky Weird Wise Wizard Mentor. Somewhat covered by Old Master but I'm too afraid for tvtropes to go dig for more specific trope names.
AnswerKenntnis:
Yoda was purposefully being as annoying as he possibly could, to test Luke's patience. Patience is key in all aspects of the "Light Side" of the Force; Jedi trained as Younglings and/or Padawans for years, even decades, to become a Jedi Knight. The Dark Path is easy and fast, and those are powerful lures. Yoda needed to be sure that Luke wouldn't follow in his father's footsteps. 

Luke WAS impatient, and he lost his hand because of it, but during Luke's training Yoda also took extra care to hammer into him what the consequences of starting down the Dark Path would be, and so Luke was able to make the right decisions despite his rather impulsive moves to place himself in temptation's path.
AnswerKenntnis:
It seemed to me he was doing two things, having fun playing the fool, and evaluating Luke's demeanor.  Yoda considered Anakin's betrayal as a personal failing for his failure to foresee and prevent the destruction of the order.  Taking on the training of another Skywalker would not have been done lightly.  

As for being alone you are never alone when you have the force.  While that may sound corny remember that through the force Yoda could connect with other living creatures on a level we do not understand.  Not to mention communicating with Quijon and Obi Wan.
AnswerKenntnis:
The hermetic nature of Yoda's isolation would give way to all sorts of social issues that would culminate when Luke came to him. Yoda, not spending much time keeping his connection with the force alive in certain aspects, would have lost some part of that connection to the force. Also, with no one to socialize with, he would probably begin to invent people to talk to because he would miss that interaction.
QuestionKenntnis:
Was the Cantina music deliberately off-tune or just an artifact of cheap production?
qn_description:
I was discussing Star Wars: A New Hope with several of my musician friends and it seems they all agree that the Cantina music was a bit out of tune. I'm not a professional musician but I have a pretty good ear, so I'm fairly certain that's the case as well.

Was that simply because Episode IV was done on a small budget (I was watching the original edition), or was it because Lucas wanted it that way to create a "hive of scum and villainly" effect? Or is this just a false impression? Did Lucas ever address this?


            
                
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
             at the beginning and 
            
                
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
             and
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Your musician friends are right - it is a bit off-tune. By design.

John Williams addressed this in an interview, and it was indeed done on purpose - to imitate the way the live music would sound in 1930s bar. See the bolded text especially:


  JW: The cantina music is an anomaly, it sticks out entirely as an unrelated rib to the score. There's a nice little story if you haven't heard this, I'll tell you briefly: When I looked at that scene there wasn't any music in it and these little creatures were jumping up and down playing instruments and I didn't have any idea what the sound should be. It could have been anything: electronic music, futuristic music, tribal music, whatever you like.
  
  And I said to George, "What do you think we should do?" And George said, "I don't know" and sort of scratched his head. He said, "Well I have an idea. What if these little creatures on this planet way out someplace, came upon a rock and they lifted up the rock and underneath was sheet music from Benny Goodman's great swing band of the 1930s on planet Earth? And they looked at this music and they kind of deciphered it, but they didn't know quite how it should go, but they tried. And, uh, why don't you try doing that? What would these space creatures, what would their imitation of Benny Goodman sound like?"
  
  So, I kind of giggled and I went to the piano and began writing the silliest little series of old-time swing band licks, kind of a little off and a little wrong and not quite matching. We recorded that and everyone seemed to love it. We didn't have electronic instruments exactly in that period very much. They're all little Trinidad steel drums and out-of-tuned kazoos and little reed instruments, you know. It was all done acoustically - it wasn't an electronic preparation as it probably would have been done today.
  
  I think that may be also part of its success, because being acoustic it meant people had to blow the notes and make all the sounds, a little out of tune and a little behind there, a little ahead there: it had all the foibles of a not-very-good human performance.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why and how did the Star Trek Universe evolve to a cashless/commerce-less society?
qn_description:
I've always wondered this ... I recall fleeting references to the lack of a money system in TNG (something about abandoning the quest for material wealth), but was it ever explained why and how and when that came about? Is there a canonical explanation? And, what motivates them in that case -- why go to work if you're not getting paid and obviously, don't need to be paid because there's no money to buy anything? Were all the main races moneyless?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
The best explanation comes from Picard in Star Trek: First Contact. He explains that in the future, humans have moved beyond the need to acquire goods and seek to better themselves.

Trip in ST:ENT also gives a good summary of how this came to be. After having made first contact with the vulcans, humans realized that there was much more to the universe than themselves. Within 100 years, war and famine were resolved on Earth.

Also, Gene Roddenberry was most likely a communist. ;)

Addendum:

While Gene Roddenberry had a general idea of where he wanted to go with the Star Trek universe, most likely he did not feature commerce because he was interested in putting pure sci-fi stories on screen (think of some old episodes and how close they are to old pulp sci-fi). So in essence, (and to reconcile with Zypher's excellent answer), we could say that the Star Trek Universe is as much cashless/commerce-less as it is toilet-less (you never see the bathrooms). In other words, it's not.

However, (most) humans are not driven by the acquisition of goods. Although this was not exactly planned as such by Roddenberry, a look at the rough timeline gives us a clue as to how this change comes about:


2026-2053: World War III - 600 million dead, many governments destroyed. By that point, we can assume most people were more concerned with day-to-day survival in a somewhat nuclear wasteland.
2063: Zefram Cochrane converts a nuclear missile into the first warp capable, human made vessel, the Phoenix. Him going to warp speed attracts attention of a nearby Vulcan ship, who come down and introduce themselves.
2151: The experimental ship Enterprise begins exploring space beyond the Solar system, after a century of rebuilding humanity, during which famine and war are eradicated. All under the watchful eye of Vulcans.
AnswerKenntnis:
There was definitely a money system in the Star Trek Universe. It was a credit based system (heck even the monetary unit was called a Federation Credit). 

You especially saw this in the DS-9 series where it played a more prominent role (as well as the Ferengi) in the store. Even today we are moving to this type of system with debit and credit cards, although cash is still a valid form of currency. Also, you should keep in mind that most of these series where set on Military vessels where there is much less need to have money at all. 

Even though they were in a time of post scarcity there was still uses for money - which are outlined in the above mentioned wikipedia article. 

These uses boil down to: 


A bartering tool between the United Federation of Planets and other governments
A means of internal budget allocation in the United Federation of Planets
A way for Federation citizens to barter for objects that cannot be replicated
AnswerKenntnis:
It's the uniforms.  No pockets, so you have to go cashless.  :)
AnswerKenntnis:
"Star Trek's replicator technology nullifies....scarcity"

Not so. This conversation is a rite of passage for any Econ major. While many things would cease to be scarce, when you get down to brass tacks, a replicator is not nearly as disruptive as you might think.

First of all, the replicator needs power to operate, so everything associated with traditional energy generation has to still happen. Even if that is super-duper anti-matter power, someone is still having to design, create and manage that to some extent.

Second of all, someone has to be designing the intellectual property represented by the replicator patterns, ala Thingiverse. People might do small things for free, but something complicated like a phaser, for example, would require a significant outlay of time and effort, which are scarce.

Third of all, there are certain goods whose scarcity is utterly unaffected by all this, most of all real estate. 

Fourth, all of human services which are non-manufacturing are still subject. Even if you can get a holographic doctor, what about artistic performances and works? Maybe robots come into play here, but as long as human beings are the customers, to a certain degree human beings are going to be providing the services. Historians? Teachers? Research scientists?

Fifth, clearly there are items which are beyond the scale of replication. DS9 was stuffed to the gills with cargo ships...presumably what the cargo ships are transporting is not replicatable, or at least not economically so.

Consider if you had a replicator right now, and could replicate any object. Irrespective of the market value of the object (replicating diamonds, for example), is there an object you could manufacture that could pay your rent / mortgage? Probably not.

The replicator would be a great boon and represent a tremendous increase in wealth for all society, but people would still have jobs, money and commerce.

It always seemed to me that it wasn't that the Federation had evolved beyond commerce, but that it was immensely, unimaginably wealthy. When you're immensely wealthy, you can pretend that you're beyond material concerns - when you're poor, it's clear to you that you're not.
AnswerKenntnis:
I find the nonexistence (or nearly so) of money in stark contrast to the principle characters favorite pastime - poker. Its hard to imagine poker being the same game if the chips are just meaningless markers.

The psychology of pocker requires that one have significant "skin in the game". If it's just some meaningless chips that will be lost, rather than a months pay if your bluff is called, it is a lot easier to feign confidence. Sure, they have a theoretical understanding of money, but that isn't the same thing as the understanding of money of someone who struggles to pay the rent.
AnswerKenntnis:
It is interesting to also note that in one of the movies (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home; aka the one with whales), Kirk states they have no use for money in the future.
AnswerKenntnis:
Why: Because Gene Rodenberry wanted to show that the Federation was a better place than contemporary America, and that was one of the ways he chose to do it.

How: He wrote the scripts that way.
AnswerKenntnis:
In our current society, money is a store of value which is independent from other material goods of value. From a highly macro perspective, its purpose is first and foremost to regulate access by individuals and other societal entities (like governments and corporations) to finite, valuable goods or services via a trade system. It is recognized by nearly all moral systems that you cannot simply take all you want; if everyone did that, the human race would have depleted Earth's resources a long time ago. The secondary purpose of currency is to store value in a portable form; a piece of paper with "100" written on it is far more portable and durable than most things $100 would buy.

However, money's not the only possible or even plausible system of regulating goods and services, or of storing value. Roddenberry proposed a system primarily based on goodwill; human thought had trancended beyond the petty need to garner wealth and instead had focused on bettering their species in the form of increased knowledge. In such a society, its members wouldn't have such primitive drives as greed.

Other systems have been implied in other series, especially in those where resources are scarcer than usual (Voyager) or where commerce with other races was more common than usual (DS9). Latinum (a material store of value similar to gold) and credits (some electronic store of value similar to the number representing your bank balance) are widely seen as a medium for trade while planetside or between races. Credits can also be seen at times as a synonym for "rations", as in "replicator credits" or "holodeck credits".

Obviously, other races in the Star Trek series are based on elements of human thought taken to their purest form, with commercial systems to match. The Vulcans value logic and reason so highly they repress all emotion to avoid polluting analysis and decision-making. In-canon, they were the main inspiration for humans to "evolve", and likely have similar abhorrence of greed and encouragement of "ideal communism" as we might call it. The Klingons go almost completely the other way; barbarians appealing to their baser instincts, kept from pure nihilism only by a strong sense of honor and family; it's generally implied that goods and services are generally produced, subsumed and disseminated from the top down in a Stalinist style. The Romulans are modeled on the Roman Empire; a system of government that can only survive as long as it can conquer and exploit new worlds and peoples. The Ferengi, obviously, are the uber-capitalists; the free market is a deity in itself, and coinage is EVERYWHERE in their society. The Cardassians in TNG and DS9 became the "new Romulans" after the Romulans themselves were backed away from pure conquest to give them more depth. The Dominion and their child races also have some Roman influence, but the Founders themselves borrow on the archetype of the super-being, so powerful that they have "outgrown" caring for the sufferings of lesser creatures. Much like the Klingons, the system is top-down; everything proceeds from the Founders. Sometimes, these opposing races bring out the darker nature of humans; for instance, the Federation resorts to germ warfare (a disease custom-designed to disable and kill Founders) in an effort to end the Dominion War.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think it was just that they evolved beyond it, toward nobler purposes. Picard was always one to be explaining that.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think what Gene meant was a "cashless society", in that all currency is virtual, rather than physical. Save for antiques still collected by collectors. Uhura had to buy her Tribble from Cyrano Jones with Federation Credits. Cyrano Jones was a merchant. Harcourt Fenton Mudd, was also into money. Ditto those miners that he delivered those mail-order brides to. Kirk also mentioned wealth in the Horta episode. Wealth was brought up again in that episode about the immortal that owned his own planet. Moving there though, cost him is immortality. There are lots of references to wealth, et cetera. Just no cash is ever shown until the Ferengi are brought into the equation. Oh let us not forget, that a Federation representative would need to visit that one planet to collect the Feds' piece of the action! The Ferengi's form of currency that they invented couldn't be replicated and thus counterfeited, namely that Gold-Pressed Latinum. EDIT: Remember when Captain Kirk talked to Scotty about "being fired" and "earning his pay" in that one episode? In one aspect, people that have a higher education, I suppose, would know about cash money anyway, as a part of their education. But if they aren't used to spending it, or seeing it, or having it, on a daily basis, why would they talk as if they still did? Also a point of interest, while the survivors of the Sleeper Ship Botany Bay didn't seem to have monetary concerns, the people from the Sleeper Ship Birdseye certainly did! Captain Picard had to inform the former rich man, than his bank accounts weren't accumulating any interest, the poor guy! I know that the  episodes are in different centuries. My point here is, that after reading some more, I can see now that there are episodes that contradict each other on the point of whether or not money still exists in the 23rd Century and beyond.
AnswerKenntnis:
I recall the concept of "transporter credits" (e.g. energy rationing) being brought up in one episode of DS9. Also, given that replicator technology essentially allows them to be a post-scarcity civilization, there is no need to purchase the basic necessities of human society - but that doesn't mean that the desire to do so is gone.
AnswerKenntnis:
Ease of energy access, and near-infinite resource creation.

Monetary economies are traditionally driven by rarity of resources and the energy required to acquire and use them. With money being an indirect means of converting one resource into another.   

Through advanced technology energy is so cheap it cannot be metered, and it can be used to create resources through replication and other advanced manufacturing and mining technologies.
With neither energy or resources being rare and having value, there is no need for money, no need for barter, no need for trade.  

Anyone can have almost anything.
QuestionKenntnis:
What is the significance of Saruman's Ring?
qn_description:
At the council of Elrond, Gandalf tells of his encounter with Saruman.


  But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and
  came to the stair of Saruman; and there
  he met me and led me up to his high
  chamber.  He wore a ring on his
  finger.


Gandalf seems draw particular attention to Saruman's ring.  Yet, to my knowledge, nothing more is ever said of his ring.  We know that Saruman had a great deal of knowledge regarding the rings of power.  Is there anything in Middle Earth lore that indicates if there was anything extraordinary about this ring?  Was Saruman emulating Sauron?  Or could the ring have been given to him by Sauron?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
According to The One Ring.net:


  In July 3018, Saruman set a trap for Gandalf, using the Brown Wizard, Radagast, to lure him to Orthanc. When Gandalf came, Saruman revealed his rebellion sporting a newly made ring of his own, and vestments of many shifting colors. When Gandalf refused to join him, Saruman made him a prisoner atop the tower. In September Gandalf was able to escape by Eagle from the tower and return to the north.


Also,


  For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman Ring-maker


So it is a magic ring that he himself made.  Not one of the numerous other existing magic rings.  Good catch, I totally missed that when I read it.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the Foreword to the second edition of The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien implied that Saruman's ring-making ability had gotten pretty advanced.  He wrote that if the War of the Ring had resembled World War II, 


  Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, would in the confusion and treacheries of the time have found in Mordor the missing links in his own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would have made a Great Ring of his own...
AnswerKenntnis:
It shows Saruman's ambitions to be on a level with Sauron as a controller of peoples, a maker of Rings of Power.
Him actively using the Palantir and thinking he is not controlled by Sauron through it is another sign of this.

Which of course shows Saruman's corruption and folly.
AnswerKenntnis:
I thought that an interesting aspect of this question was that Gandalf had possession of Narya, one of the Elven Rings of Power. 

As an aside, although Gandalf the Grey appeared subordinate to Saruman the White, Cirdan gave Gandalf this ring.
   (Gandalf himself says Saruman is greatest of their order; Cirdan sensed a greater good in Gandalf.)

However, as stated, Saruman at least temporarily defeated and imprisoned Gandalf, so Saruman's newly forged Ring must have been significantly powerful. 

Saruman was also considered a Lore-master, especially about the history of the The Rings of Power (one reason Gandalf visited Saruman in the first place), so I wonder if Saruman knew where the Elven rings were being kept and was jealous of Gandalf.
AnswerKenntnis:
It seems likely the Saruman's ring was made by him as he implied. There is however the small chance that it could be a lesser ring made by the Elves of Eregion in the second age, presumably given to him by Sauron as a gift (or a trap), or found by him during his researches. 

"In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic rings as you call them, and they were, course, of various kinds: some more potent and some less. The lesser rings were only essays in the craft before it was full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but trifles ΓÇö yet still to my mind dangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings, the Rings of Power, they were perilous.ΓÇ¥ [LotR I 2 (60)]
AnswerKenntnis:
You're right - nothing more is ever said of this ring, even when we see Saruman later in Isengard or in the Scouring of the Shire.

Saruman definitely lays claim to making the ring in the Fellowship of the Ring:


  He wore a ring on his finger. ... 'For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman Ring-maker...'


Gandalf never calls the claim into doubt so presumably he believed him, and we do have the word of the author from the foreword of the Lord of the Rings that Saruman had been researching Ring-lore:


  Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, would ... have found in Mordor the missing links in his own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would have made a Great Ring of his own with which to challenge the self-styled Ruler of Middle-earth.


We now definitely know that Saruman's ring was not a Great Ring but that Saruman had been researching rings, so it should be reasonable to assume that the ring is of Saruman's making rather than a gift from Sauron.  It is never revealed what powers it may or may not have - Saruman definitely ascribed some potency to the ring (otherwise why call attention to it), but that may have been a bluff on his behalf.

One reason that we may not have seen the ring again was because of the nature of the later appearances by Saruman - in Isengard he was up in Orthanc, not seen closely enough to identify the ring.  The remaining appearances all occur after the destruction of the One Ring and given all Ring-lore is ultimately derived from Sauron's influence on the Elven-smiths of Eregion, even the Three, Saruman's ring (if it had power) may have been rendered useless and hence discarded once that destruction occurred.
AnswerKenntnis:
Saruman's ring is really just a MacGuffin.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why were the Elves so great at archery?
qn_description:
It seems that there is an underlying assumption (I don't know of an explicit quote to confirm) that Elves in Middle Earth are exceptional archers, compared to other races.


Am I correct in that assumption? (e.g. is it confirmed by Tolkien quotes?)
If so, are there specific reasons/explanations offered for that fact? (e.g. special bow/arrow materials/technology, extra training, living in the woords, history, great eyesight etc...)


Please note that I'm only interested in the information sourced from the books, not Peter Jacksonian "Elves at Helms' Deep" inventions.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Out-of-universe, I agree with Schroedingers Cat's answer: the bow is a graceful weapon.

In-universe, I think Elves can probably master whatever weapon they choose, it's just that Legolas is the Elf we are most familiar with, and he uses a bow.

Elves are extremely long-lived, and have great agility and senses. So of course an Elf could become a great archer, but also a master swordsman or spearman. There is evidence there were Elves who were good with other weapons, such as the mighty Gil-Galad, last High King of the Noldor:


  "Gil-galad was an Elven-king.
  Of him the harpers sadly sing:
  The last whose realm was fair and free
  Between the mountains and the sea.  
  
  His sword was long, his lance was keen.
  His shining helm afar was seen.
  The countless stars of heaven's field
  Were mirrored in his silver shield."  


(emphasis mine)
AnswerKenntnis:
I seem to recall a particular line in Fellowship of the Ring (and, after some Googling, perhaps in some of the other movies) which may give us a good reason:


  ARAGORN:  Legolas!  What do your elf-eyes see?


This recurs in several other places, such as in the first half of The Two Towers, where Legolas and Gimli are in Fangorn forest:


  'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!'
  
  'Look at what?' said Gimli.
  
  'There in the trees.'
  
  'Where? I have not elf-eyes.'


And a bit later (emphasis mine)


  It seemed to Legolas, as he strained his farseeing eyes, that he caught a glint of white


This gives a strong implication that Elves have super-human visual acuity, which would naturally make them better at using any sort of ranged weapon - bows included.
AnswerKenntnis:
Out-of-universe, archery is very fitting for the elegance of the elves, it is an elegant skill. It also matches with their desire to stay largely hidden - it is a distance weapon. And, unlike many other weapons, it is not so much an impulse weapon, which fits with their image.

More in-universe, the stealthy nature of the weapon fits with their stealthy nature, and the fact that many groups live in the woods, it is one of the best weapons for hunting in the woods. They are made from the wood of the trees, and the arrows can be easily improvised, so while they are in the woods, they can probably make a new bow and arrows from the material around them.
AnswerKenntnis:
Continuously throughout Tolkien's works, it's hinted that elves are good at just about everything they do, be it crafts (F├½anor), war (Gil-Galad) or just about anything. Tolkien never states explicitly why this is (time is likely a factor as Mike Scott stated), but the feeling I get when reading the works is that they are simply better because they are (in most respects) superior beings to Men.
AnswerKenntnis:
They're immortal, so they're not going to want to be in the middle of a battle. Ranged combat like archery lets them minimize risk, and also minimize cost of failure of the skill - if they miss, hopefully they can fire again. If their skill with a sword failed them, they might already be dead. If you had an infinite length of life yet to live, wouldn't you want to take down your enemy before he could even touch you?

There are some other things mentioned in other answers that help make archery possible for them: they have a long time to learn to do it right, and maybe they have keener senses for it. And it fits with other aspects of their character, notably stealthiness. But this seems the most convincing reason to choose it in the first place.
AnswerKenntnis:
Consider Malcolm Gladwell's 10,000 hour rule -- you have to exercise any skill for around 10,000 hours to achieve mastery. For a human archer in his prime, that means he's been practising for ten hours a week for twenty years -- so he's got to be fairly dedicated. An elf may only have practised for ten hours a year, for a thousand years, and so doesn't have to make a big commitment to archery to become an expert (by human standards).
AnswerKenntnis:
I think the main reason lies in their sight. Gandalf mentioned to one the hobbits how an elf could tell small birds apart over a very long distance (a mile?). Im sorry, I cant remember which of the books that was, nor the exact wording. 

This and their general physics (light and precise movements, mandatory for aiming over long ranges) would qualify them as superior archers
AnswerKenntnis:
Not all elves were master archers. Legolas for example was of the Sindar Elves, but counted himself one of the Silvan people (specifically those that settled east of Anduin in Mirkwood). Being woodland elves, mastering archery could be considered a necessity in itself. Also, they are closely related to the Lothl├│rien elves, who made the finest bows in Middle Earth (Legolas receives such a bow from Galadriel when the fellowship sets out from L├│rien).
AnswerKenntnis:
Elves are basically one notch below Angels in the world of Tolkien, certainly "superior" to Men.  Given that and their life expectancy, I'd think any Elf who wanted to could master anything.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the books (not in the film) between Shire and Bree, Frodo and hobbit fellows met (before or after Tom Bombadil I can't remember) a group of Elves. Their leader told them he could try to offer protection from Nazgul, if he would have a battalion of elven archers like ancient times.

According to Silmarillion, Elves lived in open fields, in strong castle cities as well as forests. Tolkien does not classify them specifically as "wood elves", neither tells that Elves always lived in the forests. But at the time LoTR takes place, Elves are weak in numbers and civilization, and therefore they prefer hidden in the woods.

But there are enough number of references in the books to make us sense that bow is a preferred STANDARD weapon for Elves, no matter where they used to live.

Immortality is related to that preference not only for personal choice. As an immortal race, Elves also are rare, and most of times been, outnumbered, and strategically more limited in "casualty rates" therefore it is more costly for them to lose their members. A successfull use of ranged weapons in correct combination, is the safest way to minimize casualties, given that you have much better archers in mass scale.

Any member of any race, who can masterize bow skill, would go after it. (Humans and Orcs have also specilaized ranged untis) However, Elves as a society, have more reason, more ecological pressure, and have more resources (time,material,skill etc) to make bows standard combat weapon, no matter how good they are at other weapons.

I don't share the opininon that Elves "small size" is a point. Longbows require pulling strength, and archers in real history, are certainly big, tall, strong men, who were also very strong opponenets in close combat, often deadly with a crude melee weapon, a dagger, an axe or hammer. Close combat specilization does not require "more body and muscle mass" than archery, but simply different tactis, equipments and skills.

In real history, bows are really most skill dependent weapons. Actually, the reason why bows dissapeared from battlefield, even before modern rifles became so accurate and deadly, is the problem of training time. You may train a bunch of peasants for a few months to have a standart unit of musketeers. An archer who can use a long bow (composite or non composite) effectively and safely in battle, requires a training of 10-12 years at least, and a "sea archer" or a "mounted archher" cannot become even good enough with the weapon before 20-25 years. Lost musketeers can easily be replaced, whereas, lost archers cannot. (Ottoman archers were expected to "pull the string and set the bow" to develop strength and understanding of the limits of the bow, string, and their arms. They were not allowed even to shoot an arrow before they advance a few years in their initial training.)
QuestionKenntnis:
What is the origin of the "Riker Chair Maneuver"?
qn_description:
A video compilation of Commander Riker sitting down has recently been going around the Internet.  It demonstrates something that I had never noticed before: Riker has a rather... unusual approach to chairs on the Enterprise.


            
                
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
            

Is there any explanation offered by Jonathan Frakes, or other cast or production members, as to where this unusual maneuver originated?  Is it an intentional affectation to demonstrate some aspect of Riker's personality, or just a mannerism originating with Frakes himself?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Allegedly a back injury is behind the maneuver.  From a post on Reddit and confirmed by Wil Wheaton.  Scroll down the Reddit post to find the section pasted below.  The reply from user 'wil' is Mr. Wheaton.


  [ΓÇô]AmishAvenger 1162 points 2 days ago*
  
  Frakes had a back injury, caused by having a job moving furniture. The result is the "Riker Lean," where you often see him on set leaning on chairs or consoles, or with one leg propped up on something. You can also see his body is tilted a little when he's standing up straight.
  
  I'd guess this has something to do with that. For each time we see him sit down, he probably had to do that same move dozens of times for each take. Just lifting one leg and sitting right down was probably easier for him than turning, contorting his back, and squatting down over and over. It's the same thing with the Riker Lean: he probably had no problem standing up for a few minutes, but shooting that show probably resulted in standing on set for hours on end. Dude had to find a way to work around his injury by leaning on things, or he wouldn't have made it.
  
  EDIT: Apparently my highest-rated comment is about Jonathan Frakes' back injury, and how it affected his time on the set of TNG. Could be worse, I suppose...
  
  
    [ΓÇô]wil 906 points 1 day ago
    
    Confirmed.
    
    Source: I served on the Enterprise with Riker for 5 years.
QuestionKenntnis:
How does Picard choose a warp speed?
qn_description:
How does Picard, or anyone for that matter, decide at what warp speed to travel?  Obviously there are times when they need to get somewhere in a hurry and he says, warp 9 or maximum warp, but the rest of the time he just seems to pick a number at random. He rolls a warp 6.5 Is there some guide as to recommended speeds that he's following? Is there a speed that is the most efficient?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
One major consideration when determining the what warp factor to travel at is energy consumption: starshipsΓÇöeven in the 24th centuryΓÇödid not have infinitely renewable sources of energy, requiring massive amounts of deuterium and antideuterium to power the matter/antimatter reaction assembly in the warp core.

A second consideration is the wear and tear on the warp drive: starships, for all their sophistication, are also fine-tuned instruments that will fail under stress, especially under the strain of sustained travel at high warp.

The final consideration, that you touched upon, is the urgency of the matter at hand. The captain must take the previous considerations into account and weigh them on the pressing urgency of the current mission.

So when a starship is commissioned, it's rated for different types of travel:


Normal cruising speed until fuel exhaustion. On a Galaxy-class starship like the Enterprise-D, this would be Warp 6.
Maximum cruising speed. Traveling at this speed would be tremendously inefficient, but should cause minimal wear-and-tear. For Galaxy-class starships, this is Warp 9.2.
Maximum top speed. Traveling at this speed would be inefficient and would not be sustainable after 12 hours due to the damage it would cause to the propulsion system. Warp 9.6 on a Galaxy-class starship.


So when Picard commands Warp 6.5, he's not picking a number at random: he's considered the urgency of the mission and decided that it's worth traveling faster than the normal speeds to get to the destination.

Notes


In "Force of Nature", it's determined that high warp speeds harm the fabric of subspace, and the Federation issues a speed limit of Warp 5 unless in the case of a dire emergency. Naturally, Enterprise-D often broke or ignored that limit (episodes are rarely if ever about the non-emergency missions). It's assumed that by the time Voyager was commissioned, Starfleet was able to develop a warp system that overcame this problem.
A good engineer always knows how to push the engines beyond their rated speeds: it wouldn't be unheard of for the Enterprise-D to run consistently a notch or two above the rated speeds due to La Forge's engineering skill.
Source for the speeds is from the Star Trek: The Next Generation Technical Manual.
AnswerKenntnis:
There are almost certainly guidelines laid down for each class of ship regarding energy usage versus travel speed.

As no system is 100% efficient, there will be a law of diminishing returns when picking a warp number to travel at. For instance, Warp 6 under the original scale (it's easier) is approximately 216c. Warp 9 is approximately 729c. So, Warp 9 is approximately 3.375x faster than Warp 6. A system with even, say, 80% thermodynamic efficiency (only 20% lost to entropy) would have to put roughly 25% more energy in than it saw in returns, so travelling at Warp 9 would cost approximately 4.2 times as much energy as travelling Warp 6, for only 3 times the gain. And that's if the system is equally efficient through its performance envelope; usually entropy becomes a larger percentage of input as the amount of energy in the system increases, meaning it might cost 10 or even 20 times as much energy to travel at maximum warp than at the ships "cruising speed" (typically the speed at which the engine is most efficient).

So, the consideration is between speed and efficiency. The faster the Enterprise travels, the more often it will have to refuel, on a disproportionate scale to the number of light-years traveled. Other maintenance will be required more often as well; in the episode where the Enterprise undergoes a baryon sweep, the base engineers state that the Enterprise has travelled more distance (and acquired more harmful subatomic particles) in one year than most ships do in five. However, sometimes you simply have to travel as fast as the ship can take you (such as to drop Deanna Troi's mother off at the nearest starbase).
AnswerKenntnis:
I agree with the above answers, but I had a few other ideas of reasons not covered in the above that I thought I'd throw out there:


Sometimes they are on a specific schedule but understand that there can be delays. If they are meeting the Cardassian ambassador somewhere that takes 1 week to get to at warp 9 and 2 weeks to get to at warp 6, they can leave 2 weeks before the event and cruise at warp 6, then if something comes up en route make up time "in the air" by going at a faster speed.
They're a science vessel, so they're constantly running long-range and short-range scans, gathering data and looking for anomalies and such. It seems very likely to me that if they're just cruising around or they don't have to be anywhere any time soon, they just set the value at the fastest speed they can go while getting thorough scans of the area. Of course, maybe this is way off and you can't even run sensors from within a warp field.
QuestionKenntnis:
Story where scientist communicates with cities directly
qn_description:
In the story, a scientist discovers that cities have more or less a gestalt consciousness, and that they communicate with each other indirectly through people. He decodes this communication, and begins communicating with a city by having people wear colored t-shirts and go to particular places.

The city he communicates with experiences a sudden and rapid downturn...he "asks" the city why, and the city indicates that the other cities think that "he" is crazy. Why? Because he hears voices from nowhere! Your voice!

Cool story...may have been in Amazing Stories, or Asimov...possibly Omni.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Did China Mi├⌐ville publish short stories in anthologies? This resonates with anthropomorphic elements in Kraken.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why would killing Darth Vader or the Emperor turn Luke to the Dark Side?
qn_description:
By the end of Return of the Jedi Luke has already killed thousands of Imperial troops by blowing up the first Death Star, sliced and diced his way through Jabba's pleasure barge not to mention shish-kebabbing and blastering literally dozens of random storm troopers.

My question is why would killing Darth Vader or The Emperor be the trigger to turn Luke to the Dark Side?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
It isn't the killing that turns Luke to the Dark Side. It's his involvement with his rage WHILE killing AND using the Force to amplify his powers to do so. Rage (strong emotional states in general) is how the Sith create their charges.

It isn't the act of impersonal killing, the kind of killing a soldier might do in the line of duty. Blowing up the Death Star while potentially horrible, Luke, as a Light Side (soon to be) Jedi, takes no pleasure in its destruction. 


Luke accepts the destruction of the Death Star(s) as a terrible act done to prevent an even greater atrocity (the destruction of an entire planet) and any planet it might destroy for the Empire in the future. And while he may experience more than a bit of fear, it is nothing beyond the normal range experienced by a young Jedi in the midst of his early training.


It was the very personal act of killing done at the bidding of Dark Jedi that helps turn a Jedi into a potential Sith-in-training.


This is why the Emperor goaded Anakin when he attacked him to tap into the power of the Force, but he enrages him while doing so, ensuring he taps the Dark Side of the Force due to his emotional state.
The same thing is done by Palpatine (and Vader) when Luke is fighting Vader in order to cause his rage to grow, to establish a feedback loop to the Dark Side. 
If a Jedi grows used to using his rage as part of his connection to the Force, he can be seduced to the Dark Side slowly all the while believing he is simply growing more powerful in his use of the Force. Note how enraged Luke is while he is laying that glorious beat-down on Vader after the threat of turning Leia to the Dark Side.



            
                
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
            

"Your hate has made you powerful" said Palpatine as Luke stands over the defeated Vader.
AnswerKenntnis:
My understanding is that it's not the killing that matters so much.

Each of Vader and the Emperor was plotting to overthrow the other, and each was fully aware of what the other was up to.  Neither was strong enough on their own (Vader because he's damaged goods, the Emperor because he's older than in the Prequels), or neither felt confident of victory on their own, so they needed help: that's where Luke comes in.  Luke is being asked to pick a side: join Vader and overthrow the Emperor, or join the Emperor and overthrow Vader.

Based on this reasoning, the assumption is that Luke has already turned before he picks a side and kills one.  He's already serving the will of his new Master.  The actual turning point was not the killing, it was Luke giving in to hatred on account of the Emperor's taunting about the (he thought) failed Rebel assault, or Vader's taunting about his sister.



The evidence for this reasoning firstly comes from Vader's conversation with the Emperor in Episode V (although it will become stronger later), and from the Rule of Two (which admittedly didn't exist when the Original Trilogy was made, but as we'll see later on, it didn't need to).  Let's look at the conversation:


  EMPEROR: The Force is strong with him.  The son of Skywalker must not become a Jedi.
  VADER: If he could be turned, he would become a powerful ally.
  EMPEROR: Yes.  Yes.  He would be a great  asset.  Can it be done?


The important thing about this is that according to the Rule of Two, this cannot be done.  Luke cannot join both of them: the Rule of Two doesn't allow it.  So one of them has to go.

Furthermore, both of them would be aware of this.  So even at this point, both of them have already accepted that if Luke turns, one of them is toast.  From then on it's only a matter of which side he picks, at least so far as they're concerned.



Let's finish up with two more supporting quotes; first from Vader in Episode 5:


  You can destroy the Emperor. He has foreseen this. It is your destiny. Join me, and together we can rule the galaxy as father and son.


And secondly from Palpatine in Episode 6, crucially as Luke seems about to kill Vader:


  Good! Your hate has made you powerful. Now, fulfill your destiny and take your father's place at my side!


That seems the final conclusive proof.  There's no need to invoke the EU, no need to go beyond the Original Trilogy, everything is there in those two quotes.
AnswerKenntnis:
First lets think about how Anakin fell to the dark side.

He was desperate to save his wife, in his attempts to keep Sidious alive (and use his knowledge) he'd betrayed the jedi order and killed Windu. Sidious had been his friend since he'd arrived on Coruscant, he'd confided in him in the past (after the incident on Tatooine and when he'd killed Dooku). He'd passed the point of no return with the jedi, he felt they were holding him back the his only option was to embrace the dark side in an attempt to save Padme. The final straw was when Padme abandoned/betrayed him (and brought Obi Wan to kill him).

Lets move forward to the throne room.

Luke believed in the rebellion, he also believed Vader could be redeemed.

I don't believe the Emperor ever planned to keep two apprentices. Vader was far less powerful after his surgery, he wanted to replace him with Luke who was beginning to show real potential. To do this he created a trap.

He leaked false information to lure the rebellion into an all out attack. He intended to crush Luke's resolve in one swift stoke by destroying the rebellion in front of his eyes and forcing him to murder his own father.

If all had gone to plan then Luke would have been left with nothing, the rebellion would have been crushed, his friends would have been dead and he would have been responsible for his father's death (or Vader would kill/corrupt Leia). What options would he have? He'd have had Sidious' offer - join him and take control of the empire...

Of course things didn't exactly go to plan for Sidious!
AnswerKenntnis:
In fact the original script planned to turn Luke to the Dark side. It was planned that he puts on Darths helmet and continues his "work". You can find a reference to this "fact" here.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think the one consistent thing I've noticed in the movies (specifically in Attack of the Clones and in Empire Strikes Back) is the notion that in order to defeat the Dark Side, you have to join the Dark Side.  Both Dooku and Vader try to entice Obi-Wan and Luke, respectively, to the Dark Side.

It goes to show you the inconsistent logic that Lucas tries to portray the Dark Side (In order to defeat it you must join it).  The only way it can possibly work is your emotions overwhelm your reasoning as well as a major incentive of "the ends justify the means" approach to resolve the conflict.

I personally don't think the Jedi are any better, which may or may not be Lucas' intention.  The political undertones of democracy and dictatorship is simply a matter of degree, not a distinction in principle.
AnswerKenntnis:
From The Empire Strikes Back:

            YODA
    Run!  Yes.  A Jedi's strength 
    flows from the Force.  But beware 
    of the dark side.  Anger... fear... 
    aggression.  The dark side of 
    the Force are they.
    Easily they flow, quick to join 
    you in a fight.  If once you 
    start down the dark path, forever 
    will it dominate your destiny, 
    consume you it will, as it did 
    Obi-Wan's apprentice.

            LUKE
    Vader.  Is the dark side stronger?

            YODA
    No... no... no.  Quicker, easier, 
    more seductive.

            LUKE
    But how am I to know the good side 
    from the bad?

            YODA
    You will know.  When you are calm, 
    at peace.  Passive.  A Jedi uses 
    the Force for knowledge and 
    defense, never for attack.

            LUKE
    But tell me why I can't...

            YODA
        (interrupting)
    No, no, there is no why.  Nothing 
    more will I teach you today.
    Clear your mind of questions.  
    Mmm.  Mmmmmmmm.


Yoda attempts to impress upon Luke that the Jedi way is to act defensively, and never let emotions take over and rush into an attack. Doing so is a step towards the Dark Side of The Force.

The Emperor and Vader know this. By goading Luke into allowing his emotions and anger get the better of him, they intend to lure him to the other side.  Instead, Luke chooses the way of the Jedi, and refuses to kill his father - saving him (for now) from stepping down the road to The Dark Side of the Force.
AnswerKenntnis:
Giving in to hate and fear would turn Luke to the Dark Side. Given that Darth Vader is LukeΓÇÖs father, Luke would have to hate him a lot to kill him. If, instead, he chooses to forgive him, and spare his life, thatΓÇÖs the light side.
AnswerKenntnis:
A force sensitive being is corrupted by lusting for power, control and dominance.  Killing out of fear, anger or other selfish motives is a path to the dark side.
Whereas destroying the deathstar was for the purpose of defending his friends and other innocent free people, and therefore light-sided, destroying the emperor to take over the galaxy would be Dark-sided, as would killing Vader in revenge.
Even if done with the best intentions, it is still a dark sided act.  Mercy is a light-sided act.
Selfless, not selfish, that's the difference between light and dark, between evil and good.
AnswerKenntnis:
Luke was in a no win situation.  He wasn't powerful enough to defeat either Vader or The Emperor.  He had to choose the lesser of two evils.  When The Emperor said


  Fulfill your destiny and take your father's place at my side!


he was telling Luke to embrace the power of the Dark-Side, kill his father and become the new apprentice because there won't be a three Sith Lord Empire - only two.  Had Luke killed Vader, he'd have become Palpatine's apprentice or been killed with Sith Lightning.

Vader was more powerful than Luke and could have defeated him.  But Vader wanted Luke as his own apprentice and Vader's own darkness had been compromised (by the first duel with Luke on Bespin).  Vader was also the "Chosen One" and the only person who could defeat The Emperor and fulfill the prophesy.  Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader relied on their Sith Clairvoyance to plan Luke's seduction.  They both saw Luke as a threat to destroy The Emperor.  Neither man realized that what they were really seeing was Luke turning Vader back into the "Chosen One" through compassion to fulfill the prophesy (difficult to see - always in motion is the future).

So the act of killing Vader wouldn't have turned Luke to the Dark-Side...  Luke being in a no-win situation would've had to choose the Dark-Side to stay alive then kill Vader to become the apprentice, or help Vader kill The Emperor and become the apprentice.

Luke chose to die.  Vader screwed that up for him.
QuestionKenntnis:
Is Thor the only Avenger that can't die?
qn_description:
Thor is supposed to be a god, so he should be immortal. Does this mean that there will come a time when he is the last remaining Avenger?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
No, There were plenty of immortal Avengers over the years. Immortal having the definition of being able to survive the aging process and maintaining vigor and capability. Almost all of the "gods" of the Marvel Universe are "immortal until killed." 

They boast extremely long life-spans, appearing effectively immortal. This includes the Japanese, Greek, Egyptian, and Celtic gods who have made appearances in Marvel Comics.

In the case of the Norse gods, called Asgardians, they are not quite immortal, they depend on the golden Apples of Idunn to prolong their lives. The Asgardians also understand they will face an ultimate reckoning called Ragnarok in which many of them (most of them) will indeed die.

There are many Avengers whose origins, powers or other circumstances grant them forms of longevity or immortality. This includes androids, mutations, cosmic beings, and aliens.

Immortal until killed



The Mighty Thor while not truly immortal, he like most Asgardians, will have a very long lifespan that requires an infusion of the magical essence of the Apples of Idunn. In the Marvel Universe, Thor has faced death several times during his career and for a time was forbidden to enter the realm of Hela, goddess of Death. He lived a life trapped within a suit of life sustaining armor because while he was undying, he was still subject to injury.

Hercules: a former member of the Avengers is a Greek god and by all accounts immortal and undying unless in a confrontation with other godlike beings. He and Thor have a rivalry that goes back hundreds of years.

Ares: Greek war god possesses the typical powers of an Olympian, including superhuman strength, speed, agility, durability, reflexes, and virtual immortality, though some of his powers are substantially greater than most other Olympians. Ares is functionally immortal in the sense that he is immune to the effects of aging and hasn't aged since reaching adulthood. He is also immune to any known terrestrial disease or infection. Since he exiled himself from Olympus, his durability has been reduced enough for him to be affected by conventional weapons.

Valkyrie has been a member of the Defenders and the Avengers. She is the strongest of all Valkyrior. Like all Asgardians, her tissue and bone are several times as dense as the mortal equivalent. Though she is not immortal, she ages far more slowly than humans. Valkyrie is immune to all terrestrial diseases and is resistant to most forms of injury. Her Asgardian physiology grants her superhuman levels of stamina. While her character has been transformed several times, the basic powers of an Asgardian were hers and she would have had the same lifespan as any member of Asgard as long as she consumed the Apples of Idunn.



The Incredible Hulk(s) - (She-Hulk, Red Hulk): while it has never been substantiated, the Hulk's regenerative abilities means he will never age or will age incredibly slowly in relationship to other humans. It is safe to assume all Hulks (red or green) will have the same nearly-immortal quality. It is unknown whether any of the Hulk's will age while in their human form.

Firebird (Bonita Juarez) is a person who has been mutated by an unknown bombardment of radiation from an alien scientific experiment. The mutation has given her the power of pyrokinesis and precognition. She has also been proven to be unable to be killed by an Elder of the Universe. The source of said immortality is as yet unknown.

Mr. Immortal possesses the superhuman ability of immortality. Once he reaches the point of death, he regenerates from any and all injuries. When he wakes from his death, he is completely healed from any and all previous injuries and may wake in a rage. He also does not age. The cosmic being Deathurge indicated Mr. Immortal cannot be killed and will eventually outlive the human race. 

Able to Be Repaired



Jocasta was a titanium alloy-based android whose mental capacities were designed and created by Hank Pym (Ant Man, Giant Man, Yellowjacket) and based on the engrams of his then wife, Janet Van Dyne (Wasp). Her android body was capable of surviving an incredible amount of damage and she is able to transfer her consciousness into other bodies based on her original design.

The Vision was a synthezoid created by Ultron (who was created earlier by Hank Pym) designed to infiltrate and destroy the Avengers. His synthetic body while appearing human was capable of a range of superhuman abilities including limited flight and density modification, making him able to pass through matter or become diamond hard and almost invulnerable. Despite these powers, the Vision was destroyed several times during his history, usually at the hands of incredible foes such as Count Nefaria. After his last rebuild by Tony Stark, the Vision left the Avengers.

Not Remotely Human



The Avenger, Simon Williams, codenamed Wonder Man, had his entire body replaced with a form of "ionic" energy. While he can appear to be a normal human, he has none of the requirements of a living being. He does not need to eat, sleep or excrete. He can exist under hostile conditions including space and does not appear to age at all.

The Sentry: Arguably one of the most powerful of the Avengers, has a host of superhuman abilities. Superhuman strength, speed and resilience, he is able to fight the entire team of the Avengers to a standstill. There are many theories around his powers and their origin. It has been suggested that he is not even human but an avatar of a near-divine being or force similar to Death, the Phoenix Force or Thanos.

Jack of Hearts, whose mutagentic powers included an alien parent and an immersion in the mysterious Zero Fluid allowed him to project incredible amounts of energy. He has superhuman stamina and resistance to injury. He has restarted the energies of a dying sun at one point in his career. Having died more than once, his connection to the zero-point energy has revived him. What he body is composed of now is unknown but it is certain he is no longer human in the classic sense.

Beyond Human Longevity



Captain America has been in the peak of physical health since 1945. It is suspected the super-solder serum protected him during his period underwater frozen in the Artic and has slowed his aging process significantly. 

Starfox is a member of the long-lived offshoot of humanity known as the Eternals. His body has been enhanced by cosmic energy to the point that it ages far more slowly than most humanoids and is superhumanly strong and resistant to harm and immune to terrestrial diseases. He can withstand impacts, such as falling from several stories or being repeatedly struck with superhuman force, that would severely injure or kill an ordinary human being with little to no injury to himself. However, he is far from invulnerable and can be injured by weapons, such as bullets or knives, composed of conventional materials. 

Wolverine: a mutant that has been seen so far to be effectively immortal and has already lived a life significantly longer than a normal human. His body's regenerative processes make it likely he will continue to exist for decades to come. What such a long lifespan does to his mind, however, is another question.
AnswerKenntnis:
Thor is not truly a god, but an Asgardian hailing from Asgard. As such thor is incredibly long lived, see here. He does rely on The golden apples of Idunn for his long-lived attributes.

As for being the final Avenger, well the Avengers have grown since their initial start up. As such he may be the final one of the original make-up depending on how Captain America ages.
AnswerKenntnis:
Norse gods (├åsir and Vanir) are not immortal.  In particular, it is foretold in Norse myth that Thor will die of a serpent's venom during Ragnar├╢k.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the one shot comic HULK: The End Hulk is the only person left in the world. It's just him and cockroaches. So really Hulk is the only immortal on the team.
AnswerKenntnis:
Wonder Man is immortal too. He "died" a couple of times, but the Scarlet Witch brought him back out of ionic energy or something.

From Wikipedia:


  Due to Wonder Man's self-regenerating ionic energy, he has the ability
  to exist indefinitely without air, food, or water, and he no longer
  ages.
AnswerKenntnis:
It's like this. As far as Thor being immortal.
He can age, he can never die.  But he can be killed.  He can never die from age or sickness. 
Remember Aries got killed by a demi god.
The frost giant was about to kill Thor's father.
They can live forever, unless they are killed or choose to die.
AnswerKenntnis:
The Hulk without a doubt would be the last one standing. His healing factor, plus aging , as well as His anger all will allow him to stand the test of time.
AnswerKenntnis:
Thor can in fact be killed. In the Ragnarok story line he and all the Asgardians were briefly killed. While Thor will probably never die of old age it is possible for him to die in battle.
AnswerKenntnis:
In Thor movie , Odin was about to die. so basically thor is also not immortal. if odin ages so does thor.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why weren't the Three Rings for the Elven-kings destroyed as well?
qn_description:
At the end of The Return of the King, after the One Ring is destroyed in the fires of Mount Doom, the rings were carried out of Middle-Earth.  

IIRC it may have been Elrond, Galadriel, and Gandalf who carried them out separately, or Elrond carried all three out ΓÇ£over the sea.ΓÇ¥

These rings are now the most powerful artifacts in Middle-Earth after the One Ring is destroyed.  

Why still hold them and not destroy these rings as well?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Sauron did not directly participate in the creation of the Three Rings, so they were free of its corrupting influence.
So although he did intend the One Ring to rule them all, the Three were tied to the One's power but their wearers did not become corrupted by Sauron's influence. Thus there was no compelling need to destroy them. This leaves the question of why the Three were kept, rather than discarded or destroyed just in case.

I believe the Three's power after the destruction on the One is left unresolved. During the council of Elrond (LOTR 2.II), the assembled experts don't know:


  ΓÇÿBut what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed, as you counsel?ΓÇÖ asked Gl├│in.
  ΓÇÿWe know not for certain,ΓÇÖ answered Elrond sadly. ΓÇÿSome hope that the Three Rings, which Sauron has never touched, would then become free, and their rulers might heal the hurts of the world that he has wrought. But maybe when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will fade and be forgotten. That is my belief.ΓÇÖ


Galadriel seems to hold a similar opinion (LOTR 2.VII).


  [Galadriel is talking to Frodo.] ΓÇÿYet if you succeed, then our power is disminished, and Lothl├│rien will fade, and the tides of Time will sweep it away. We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell and cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.ΓÇÖ


After the destruction of the One Ring, Gandalf has this to say (LOTR 6.V):


  ΓÇÿThe Third Age of the world is ended, and the new age is begun [ΓÇª]; the power of the Three Rings is also ended. And all the lands that you see, and those that lie about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time comes of the Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.ΓÇÖ


Finally (LOTR 6.IX), it is revealed that the Three will be worn by their respective wielders as they leave Middle-earth together:


  Upon [Elrond's] finger was a ring of gold with a great blue stone, Vilya, mightiest of the Three. On [Galadriel's] finger was Nenya, the ring wrought of mithril, that bore a single white stone flickering like a frosty star.
  [ΓÇª] Gandalf now wore openly upon his hand the Third Ring, Narya the Great, and the stone upon it was red as fire.


The Silmarillion includes a chapter ΓÇ£On the Rings of Power and the Third AgeΓÇ¥. Its summary of the events is that


  [ΓÇª] the One and the Seven and the Nine are destroyed; and the Three have passed away, and with them the Third Age is ended [ΓÇª].
  
  But when all [the events of LOTR] were done, and the Heir of Isildur had taken up the lordship of Men, and the dominion of the West had passed to him, then it was made plain that the power of the Three Rings also was ended, and to the Firstborn the world drew old and grey.


In light of these clues, there are several reasonable theories:


The Three have become pretty but useless baubles, kept as souvenirs.
The Three's power is disminished but not extinguished.
The Three's power remains intact.


My interpretation is that Tolkien purposefully left this unresolved. After the end of the Third Age, the world belongs to the humans. The magic has left. This goes beyond the Three Rings: the elves had magic before the rings and will still have magic after, but their time has passed. Maybe the Three still have some power, maybe they don't, but primarily they must not leave a mark any longer: the Three must not remain, by need of historicity. The fate of the Three Rings after they have left Middle-earth is for us humans to speculate about, not know of.
AnswerKenntnis:
Because they aren't corrupting influences like the One Ring was.  The Elven rings didn't have any evil baggage, so they were acceptable to keep.
AnswerKenntnis:
The rings are tied to their bearers and vice versa. It's fairly clear that if the Elves remained they'd grow weaker and weaker hence they left for the West. I'd surmise the same was true for the rings. Over time they'd lose power and become mundane and in fact had already started to do so well before the One was ever found again just like the elves had since the last alliance of men and elves.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think the other piece of relevent information comes from a letter of Tolkien's, 


  In ["The Rings of Power"] we see a sort of second fall or at
  least ΓÇÿerrorΓÇÖ of the Elves. There was nothing wrong essentially in
  their lingering against counsel, still sadly with the mortal lands of
  their old heroic deeds. But they wanted to have their cake without
  eating it. They wanted the peace and bliss and perfect memory of ΓÇÿThe
  WestΓÇÖ, and yet to remain on the ordinary earth where their prestige as
  the highest people, above wild Elves, dwarves, and Men, was greater
  than at the bottom of the hierarchy of Valinor. They thus became
  obsessed with ΓÇÿfadingΓÇÖ, the mode in which the changes of time (the law
  of the world under the sun) was perceived by them.... Sauron found
  their weak point in suggesting that, helping one another, they could
  make Western Middle-earth as beautiful as Valinor. It was really a
  veiled attack on the gods, an incitement to try and make a separate
  independent paradise. Gilgalad repulsed all such overtures, as also
  did Elrond. But at Eregion great work began - and the Elves came their
  nearest to failing to ΓÇÿmagicΓÇÖ and machinery. With the aid of SauronΓÇÖs
  lore they made Rings of Power (ΓÇÿpowerΓÇÖ is an ominous and sinister word
  in all these tales, except as applied to the gods).
  
  The chief power (of all the rings alike) was the prevention or
  slowing of decay (i.e. ΓÇÿchangeΓÇÖ viewed as a regrettable thing), the
  preservation of what is desired or loved, or its semblance - this is
  more or less an Elvish motive. But also they enhanced the natural
  powers of a possessor - thus approaching ΓÇÿmagicΓÇÖ, a motive easily
  corruptible into evil, a lust for domination.


So, as others have said, the rings didn't have power once the One Ring was destroyed, but the Three Rings never really should have been in Middle Earth to begin with, so removing them was the right thing.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why was Gandalf involved with the Dwarves mission to rob Smaug?
qn_description:
From what I understand, the Istari were sent in to help the peoples of Middle Earth get through the third age. Why then, did Gandalf help the Dwarves along (and get Bilbo involved) in their mission to rob Smaug?

It doesn't seem to have any use, and I don't remember him having shown any sign of precognition that support a theory relating to knowledge of the finding of the ring or the death of Smaug.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
First, keep in mind that when The Hobbit was published, it was essentially a standalone story. Tolkien had the idea of hobbits independently of his already well-developed but unpublished work on what is now known as the First Age. In modern terms, we'd say that The Lord of the Rings is a giant retcon. The now-common text of The Hobbit is itself a revised edition of the 1937 original, made to fit the sequel better.

Appendix A of The Lord of the Rings includes the story Durin's Folk. This story is the canonical answer to your question. It briefly tells the tale of the Dwarves' time in Erebor before and after the coming of Smaug, the longing for a reconquest of Khazad-d├╗m (Moria), and the fate of Thr├íin (Thorin's father). It also gives an account of Gandalf's meeting with Thorin. Gandalf wanted Smaug destroyed in preparation for a full-fledged war against Sauron, in order for the Dwarves in the Iron Hills not to have to fight on two fronts.


  Among many cares [Gandalf] was troubled in mind by the perilous state of the North; because he knew then already that Sauron was plotting war, and intended, as soon as he felt strong enough, to attack Rivendell. But to resist any attempt from the East to regain the lands of Angmar and the northern passes in the mountains there were now only the Dwarves of the Iron Hills. And beyond them lay the desolation of the Dragon. The Dragon Sauron might use with terrible effect. How then could the end of Smaug be achieved?


Tolkien started to write a more detailed story of the background to The Hobbit, but he never finished it. It is published in the Unfinished Tales under the title The Quest of Erebor.

After Gandalf's meeting with Thorin, he was unconvinced by the latter's plan to fight Smaug directly. He thought the Dwarves didn't have a chance, and would sacrifice their lives in a foolish venture. As Gandalf happened to visit the Shire next, he thought of sending a hobbit along, to contribute stealth to the party.


  Suddenly in my mind these three things came together: the great Dragon with his lust, and his keen hearing and scent; the sturdy heavy-booted Dwarves with their old burning grudge; and the quick, soft-footed Hobbit, sick at heart (I guessed) for a sight of the wide world.


Gandalf further realizes that he has obtained from the dying Thr├íin in Sauron's jail a way to enter Erebor unnoticed (the map and key). It is not clear from that version if Gandalf has an actual premonition that Bilbo's participation is necessary, or if this is merely a realistic evaluation of the party's chances and an argument to convince Thorin to take Bilbo on. In Gandalf's words:


  I knew in my heart that Bilbo must go with him, or the whole quest would be a failure. (ΓÇª) ΓÇÿListen to me, Thorin Oakenshield !ΓÇÖ I said. ΓÇÿIf this hobbit goes with you, you
  will succeed. If not, you will fail. A foresight is on me, and I am warning
  you.ΓÇÖ
AnswerKenntnis:
The history has to do with one of the seven Rings of Power given to Dwarves.

Quoting from Wiki:


  As Thr├íin grew older, he was driven by the malice of his ring and the desire for gold gnawed at his heart. He left [his son] Thorin for the Wilderlands, but was captured and imprisoned in Dol Guldur in southern Mirkwood. There, the last of the Dwarven Rings of Power was taken from him and he was left in the dungeon to die.
  
  Gandalf the Grey found Thr├íin while on a mission to Dol Guldur to discover the identity of "The Necromancer", a mysterious Dark Lord who was later revealed to be Sauron. 
  
  Moments away from death, Thr├íin gave him the old map. Gandalf promised to deliver it to Thr├íin's son, but Thr├íin, who was delirious with pain, had forgotten his name, so Gandalf did not expect to be able to fulfil this promise. Thr├íin died soon afterwards.
  
  Later, Gandalf met with Thorin near Bree, and realized that he was the son of the captured dwarf in Dol Guldur. He promised to help Thorin with the Quest of Erebor, and invited a hobbit named Bilbo Baggins along to take the role of burglar.


Parts of this were covered in Appendix A and B of LOTR
AnswerKenntnis:
Tolkien wrote a short story "The Quest of Erebor", which was later published in Unfinished Tales in 1980. It consists almost entirely of Gandalf telling Frodo (after King Elessar's coronation in Minas Tirith) how he got involved with the Thorin et al.:


  Gandalf knew that Smaug the Dragon could pose a serious threat if used by Sauron, then dwelling in Dol Guldur in Mirkwood. He was thinking about the matter when he met Thorin Oakenshield at Bree. Thorin also was concerned about Smaug, but had the different motive of revenge and the reclaiming of the Dwarves' treasure in the Lonely Mountain. Gandalf agreed to help Thorin.
  
  Gandalf thought Bilbo, an unlikely choice, to be a suitable companion to Thorin and his Dwarves for a number of reasons. First, he had observed that Bilbo took more of an interest in the world at large than was usual for Hobbits, and was thus more likely to be adventurous. Another reason was that Smaug would not recognize the scent of a Hobbit, advantageous to a stealthy operation and likely to distract the dragon's attention. Thorin also did not think highly of Hobbits, and putting Bilbo in the expedition might prevent the proud Thorin from rash actionsΓÇösuch as openly challenging Smaug.


Note that it's kind of quasi-canonical, since it was published after Tolkien's death. But it seems to fit very nicely, and I wouldn't be surprised if it gets worked into the upcoming movies.
AnswerKenntnis:
One simple in-universe explanation is that Gandalf needs to maintain goodwill with all the races and has to strengthen them (in ways he deems good) whenever possible. 

So when Thorin proposes his expedition to the Lonely Mountain, Gandalf achieves both goals simultaneously by helping them- earning goodwill and strengthening the dwarves.
QuestionKenntnis:
What is the end of 2001: A Space Odyssey about?
qn_description:
The end of 2001: A Space Odyssey movie features bizarre colours and the main character appearing in a bed, then becoming an old man and finally a fetus!

I always found this a pretty disappointing end to the film because it seemed to make no sense.

Does anyone know what this is about? Is it symbolism? Or is it just random images?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
The being that placed the monolith are the caretakers of the universe.  They encourage new species to develop, like seedlings.  Sometimes they have to tear out weeds before they get out of control.  The monolith buried on the moon was a signaling device to let the aliens know that man had sufficiently developed to invent space flight and thereby become a potential problem.  The monolith by Jupiter was a gateway to their home world.  There, Bowman lived out his life under observation while the aliens judged humankind's maturity.  When they were satisfied, the gave him the powers of a god and sent him back to earth, again as a test to see how he would use his powers.

You can read all of this in the novel, as well as a short story by Arthur C. Clarke, called The Sentinel.
AnswerKenntnis:
Going only on what's on the screen, this question may be impossible to answer without resorting to interpretation, and there are many interpretations of the ending of 2001. 

While the novel, developed by Clarke and Kubrick at the same time as the film, is more straightforward than the film, several events are different than in the film, so the film needs to be interpreted on its own. I'm excluding things that were explained in the book for that reason: 

I think it's fairly clear in the film that the monolith that appeared at the dawn of Man either affected the primates by causing them to use tools, or was there to witness the beginning of tool use. This is symbolized by the bone that is thrown in the air, before a match-cut to a satellite. 

When another monolith is discovered on the moon (the first one, as far as the human race knows at the time), a ship is sent to Jupiter to follow the transmission that the Tycho monolith (the one found on the moon) sent in that direction. Did the monolith cause the trip or hasten it? We really don't know, although the fact that we got a ship launched within a couple of years after the Tycho event hints at a mission that was already in the planning stages. 

The story made a clear point of showing Bowman re-entering the ship without a helmet, immediately prior to disconnecting Hal, his last remaining co-shipmate. Hal's final act is to trigger a recording that explains the real reason behind the mission: to investigate the Jupiter system, to find what the Tycho monolith was transmitting towards. Bowman has, in effect, cut himself off from all immediate contact. Despite his desperate attempt to rescue Poole, he is all alone, without even a computer for company.  

What we know about the events in the last act of the film, "Jupiter and Beyond the Infinite": 


Bowman is all alone on the Discovery, and exits the ship in a pod. This same type of vehicle killed Poole, and Bowman used one of them to survive. 
He approaches the Jupiter monolith, and is subjected to an experience that draws him away from Jupiter. He may (or may not) have been brought to other planets, star clusters, and galaxies. 
Bowman and the Pod are suddenly no longer in space, but in an ornate room; Bowman is shaken severely, possibly in shock.  
Bowman ages, experiencing the rest of his quiet, calm life in this suite of rooms. (He may experience this himself or see it happening from the outside. This aging may happen in the time it takes for a human being, or it may be sped-up. The film is ambiguous on these points, as on many others. Not to veer too closely to interpretation here, but note that viewpoints are a theme running throughout the film.) 
The monolith appears in Bowman's room as he dies, and it either witnesses or causes his transfiguration into an embryo. The embryo leaves the room for space. 


So, the story is unclear on what exactly happened. Did the monoliths cause all of these events, or simply witness them, possibly knowing that they would happen? Over how much time does the final act take place? 

Both Clarke and Kubrick seem to enjoy narratives that answer questions with other, grander questions.
AnswerKenntnis:
I used to hate the end to 2001.  I didn't understand it, there was no narrative, and it was confusing.

Then I read a comment somewhere from, I believe, Arthur C. Clarke, that the ending of the movie is meant to represent our inability to understand encounters with an alien species.  They would be so different from us , that our minds simply wouldn't be able to comprehend them.  As one of Clarke'e three laws states, "any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic."

Essentially, you're supposed to be confused, because you would be if meeting aliens in real life.
AnswerKenntnis:
He's converted into a star child, an immortal being that winds up being put in charge of protecting Earth. The book ended this way as well, rather vaguely. The movie seems to do this as well, but in a more symbolic fashion (I assume a star child isn't just a fetus).
AnswerKenntnis:
It's symbolic.  The crazy colors are him going through hyperspace.  Then he grows old and learns that humanity is just a baby compared to the aliens that made the monolith.

Essentially, the monolith with the apes at the beginning got humans to start using tools.  Then the monolith on the moon got humanity to reach to other planets.  Even after all that, we're still insignificant compared to the millions of years older aliens.
AnswerKenntnis:
One of my favorite explanations is that it's meta-cinema (source added by commenter below). 

The movie is about the evolution / expansion of the mind, and Kubrick is pushing the limits of film. We become Dave - colors and lights flying at us in the theater. We become the apes struggling to understand.

Also, the monolith is similar dimensions to the movie screen, and the movie screen is "full of stars".
AnswerKenntnis:
I don't believe it's a case of Bowman living out his entire life under the Firstborn's (the aliens) observation. Bowman returns to Earth as a "starchild" in time to visit his mother before she dies (2010: Oddyssey Two). Since the Firstborn do not seem to possess time travel capability, it was very likely a representation of some form of transformation. This explains the final scene in Kubrick's own words: imdb.com/title/tt0062622/faq#.2.1.42


  KUBRICK: I don't want to [be specific about it] because I think that
  the power of the ending is based on the subconscious emotional
  reaction of the audience, which has a delayed effect.
  
  KUBRICK: Well, I can tell you what literally, at the lowest level of
  plot, happens. Bowman is drawn into a stargate. He is taken into
  another dimension of time and space, into the presence of godlike
  entities who have transcended matter and who are now creatures of pure
  energy. They provide an environment for him, a human zoo, if you like.
  They study him. His life passes before him. He sees himself age in
  what seems just a matter of moments, he dies, and he's reborn,
  transfigured, enhanced, a superbeing.
AnswerKenntnis:
Once I was looking out the window of an airplane as it was landing at night and thought, THAT's what the ending meant.  Below, the city lights formed strange aquatic clusters and patterns.  I couldn't tell what they were from that perspective. 
To an ape, it would be completely incomprehensible.  The aliens are to us as we are to apes, at least...  Probably the aliens don't think much of their psychedelic intergalactic catapults; they're just everyday things.
AnswerKenntnis:
The "psychadelic" sequence is what Bowman sees as he breaks the speed of light by
entering a transdimensional space warp; the
patterns are stars as he rushes past them.  After this sequence, he passes through
a globular star cluster, and also by several gasseous nebulae.  Finally, just before
he ends up in the mysterious room, he is passing over a planetary surface, presumably
the home world of the aliens who built the monoliths.  The aliens may have once been an aquatic species, but are now non-corporeal intellegences.  The planet orbits a red giant
star which is why the colors appear so distorted.
AnswerKenntnis:
After the psychadelic interlude the room and so on, it's meant to represent communication with Aliens. You have no common frame of reference with an alien and they're guessing at best in trying to make themselves understood by you so you're not meant to understand a damn thing. This is apparently the whole point - you don't and aren't meant to understand.

Yeah, it's really that pretentious. I have gone through my whole life with people quoting "open the pod bay doors, Hal" at me and I just wish it was a better film, it's famous because the SFX were really great for that time and it latched onto the space-race cold war frenzy of Apollo missions etc. Pan-Am flights to space stations in the foreseeable future.
AnswerKenntnis:
2001:A Space Odyssey symbolically describes the story of mankind's life. The monolith is the symbol for "truth of life". 

As we see in the beginning of the movie a bunch of apes -- the early men -- come across the Monolith and they have no idea what it is. 

The movie continues with a brilliant transformation to a far far future by converting a piece of simple bone to a very sophisticated spaceship (both symbols for the tools humans use). After millions of years pass, and all these developments human has reached aside (being able to step into other planets and using plenty of complex tools), mankind still doesn't know what the Monolith is. 

At the end of all mankind's development, a man goes through all the universe (passing into strange colors) and becomes old enough in this journey, but after all this, when he gets to the Monolith, all the knowledge he's gained over millions of years is worthless and still he doesn't know what his life is about! So he turns into an embryo because there is no difference between an unknowing fetus and an old experienced knowledgeable man in terms of understanding the truth of life.
AnswerKenntnis:
i believe that when dave experiences his journey and finally ends up in the strange outdated rooms and sees himself eating then vanishes when the dave who is eating goes to investigate a "presence"-- i believe a kind of time travel has happened. then it happens again when dave sees the dying version of himself in the bed. it almost feels like time is catching up. as for the creepy fetus. i believe that the monolith always had a plan for dave. and i believe that they reincarnated him. again my theory. trippy film that will alwsys have people posing questions. and that is the sign of a classic film:)
AnswerKenntnis:
It is important to note that Kubrick wanted the individual to make his/her own interpretation.  The base story is quite clear and Kubrick himself explained it.  However, as a scholar studying an MA in medieval history, the metaphysical explanation is compelling.  It is nothing less than a futuristic interpretation of the achievement of the Holy Grail as perceived by Wolfram von Esenbach.  Parsifal (Perceval) was an archer (Bowman) who sinned by shooting a swan (a metaphor in itself).  The Grail was a stone which descended from heaven (monolith).  After tremendous trials and tribulations, Parsifal achieves the Grail and heals mankind via a metaphysical union with God (Nirvana/Life the Universe and Everything) and in doing so purifies humanity.  The story was designed for hearing rather than reading and the troubadours undoubtedly had the power to 'act' the words in such a way that the unsophisticated 12th century listeners would in some way achieve an experiential  understanding of the union.  In the 21st century we are too high tech. to be swayed by storytelling.  However, Kubrick's brilliant melding of images and 'Also Sprach Zarathustra' can provide even the most cynical amongst us with an almost visceral appreciation of 'something higher' or 'not quite within reach'.  Naturally, Kubrick was correct - it is for each individual to try to reach their own understanding but try listening to the final moments of 'Parsifal' by Wagner, or even better, Siegfried's funeral music used to great effect in 'Excalibur' for tone poetical interpretation.
AnswerKenntnis:
I feel that the scenes depicted inside the mansion are Bowman's dying dream, he is in fact dead by the time the spacecraft stops. Actually the computer (HAL) tries to sabotage the mission to Jupiter since it feels its like a suicidal one way mission and even tries to talk about this to Bowman earlier.
AnswerKenntnis:
Just to point out, as in the book, when the starchild destroys the nukes, so to was supposed to be in the movie, however he didn't do that, but the reason for the NUKES was to to show, that even though we had advanced to such great technological abilities, we are still like the apes trying to bash in each others heads in at the begining when we started using tools, he wanted us to mull over that, our first use for a tool was to...Kill, and our most advanced tool is ...a killer(nukes).
With regards to the aliens, that's up for interpretation, the aliens were either just monitoring our progression, OR started it to begin with. I for one think they started our rapid evolution, and were always watching, and I think our creating artificial inteligence (HAL) is what made them realise, its time for us go the next step, they created us, and they where like so different to us, that a AI to them is same and no better the we are to them. We can create a thing that not only as intelligent (actually more so some may say) as us, but is SELF AWARE, that's a very powerfull concept, even if u say its just a program, and computor, it KNOWS it exists, and that's another thing he wanted us to think about.
QuestionKenntnis:
What is the largest (engineered) physical object dreamed of in science fiction?
qn_description:
I can think of 3 kinds of big. 


By volume
By a linear measure
By mass or weight


Bonus points for all three. Extra bonus points for the object being realistic in construction.

Let's add to it that it not be naturally occurring.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
The biggest in terms of volume would probably be a Matrioshka brain.


  A Matrioshka brain is a collection of multiple Concentric Dyson Spheres which make use of different wavelengths of light.


Here's the list from Wikipedia's article on Megastructures where I found it:


  
  The Alderson disk is a theoretical structure in the shape of a disk, where the outer radius is equivalent to the orbit of Mars or Jupiter and the thickness is several thousand miles. A civilization could live on either side, held by the gravity of the disk and still receive sunlight from a star bobbing up and down in the middle of the disk.
  A Dyson sphere (also known as a Dyson Shell) refers to a structure or mass of orbiting objects that completely surrounds a star to make full use of its solar energy.
  Larry Niven's Ringworld is an artificial ring with a radius roughly equal to the radius of the Earth's orbit. A star is present in the center and the ring spins to provide artificial gravity.
  A Matrioshka brain is a collection of multiple Concentric Dyson Spheres which make use of different wavelengths of light.
  A Stellar engine either uses the temperature difference between a star and interstellar space to extract energy or serves as a Shkadov thruster.
  A Shkadov thruster accelerates an entire star through space by selectively reflecting or absorbing light on one side of it.
  Topopolis (also known as Cosmic Spaghetti) is a large tube that rotates to provide artificial gravity.
  


A couple of the others that move entire stars around would probably be considered bigger in terms of mass if you count the mass of the star.
AnswerKenntnis:
In Greg Egan's Diaspora, the manufactured objects at the end of the characters' journey are inconceivably vast in terms of our universe. Each sub-atomic particle contains an entire universe, each sub-atomic particle of which contains an entire universe, then iterate millions of times until you get to our universe.

Nothing else in SF comes within trillions of orders of magnitude of being as large.
AnswerKenntnis:
Isaac Asimov's Multivac.

In "The Final Question," Asimov refers to the last version of Multivac as the known universe. It finally becomes a god when it answers the question: Can entropy be reversed?
AnswerKenntnis:
A device that's surrounding a star is fun but why not use those stars to build something? Fry did it!
AnswerKenntnis:
How about the Great Attractor created by the Xeelee in Stephen Baxter's Ring? Being an artificial structure of galactic super-cluster proportions, it should at least be on the list.
AnswerKenntnis:
In Stargate Atlantis the star gate's on Earth and Atlantis create a wormhole three million light years in length. It is a single engineered object when instantiated. Of course three million light years is its perceived external length; presumably it is much shorter when travelling through it.

The wormhole in Stargate Universe at the start of the series is much longer (but I don'r recall how long).
AnswerKenntnis:
Not as big as an universe, but the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy"'s planet-builders are impressive and fascinating.



Unfortunately, the planets would be naturally occurring, but, who knows at the end...
AnswerKenntnis:
In The Galaxy Railways there is a galactic size interstellar railway system. (This is the same universe as the Harlock Saga, and Galaxy Express 999)
AnswerKenntnis:
Ringworld However, I know you guys can do better! It is roughly 300 million miles in circumference and about 1 AU in radius (i.e., 93 million miles). It is composed of material with a tensile strength close to that of the strong nuclear force. It is roughly as massive as all the planets in a star system.
AnswerKenntnis:
Schlock Mercenary has a power generator built from the Galactic Core. It was originally built as a sort of trojan-horse (the beings who designed it wanted our galaxy destroyed, the beings who built it were misled into thinking it was just a generator). It was stopped from being a bomb and kept as just a generator by an alliance of pretty much every sapient around, along with the formation of the largest AI around.
AnswerKenntnis:
In "Bill, The Galactic Hero", ships are powered by a "Bloater Drive" which causes the ship to expand until it's as big as the galaxy. When the ships are that big, the individual atoms are so far apart that no one notices the presence of the ship. The ship is then reduced back to its original size at a different location.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the Star Trek universe, itΓÇÖs surely the Borg Collective. It spans a significant proportion of our galaxy.
AnswerKenntnis:
in Time Keeps on Slippin, an episode of Futurama, Fry uses a Bad-Ass Gravity Pump to move a whole mess of stars to spell out a message to Leela. The message reads: "I Love You, Leela."
AnswerKenntnis:
In Dan Simmons' Endymion books, the Ousters were growing modified trees in orbit around a star, intending to eventually enclose it completely in a living Dyson sphere. I remember the phrase "Leaves the size of continents". Though they did not do so in the book, their plan was to eventually do this with other stars, and maybe connect them, to fill the space between with life. I give them credit for thinking big.

Also, in Carl Sagan's Contact, 


   at the very end of the book it is mentioned that a message is  hidden in the digits of PI, which suggests that all of space/time was created by something...
AnswerKenntnis:
In Terry Pratchett's Strata, the protagonists' job is to build habitable planets with fake histories, such as fossils for beings that never actually existed.  There seems to be an irresistible urge for such builders to include little impossibilities as signatures.  The characters do learn more during the book, and...


   At the end of the book, the protagonists find one of those little indications that their Universe was built by people with the same "signature" habit.
AnswerKenntnis:
In Stargate universe, Rush discovered that the Destiny was launched to investigate a hidden message written onto the cosmic microwave background. Presumably some intelligence that existed prior to our universe's existence was able to emplace this message using undreamt of physics. Unfortunately the series terminates, so we will never find out who (or what) created it for what purpose. But it does span the entire universe!
AnswerKenntnis:
In mass this might not be very big, but in terms of the scale of distance it covers, it's HUGE - the stargate's in the stargate series. A series of wormhole transports that span not only this galaxy, but connect over to another (Andromeda) galaxy.
AnswerKenntnis:
In Peter Watt's Blindsight, the alien artifact Rorschach is incredibly massive (although shadowed by a nearby planet), but there are indications that it is constantly growing, possibly beyond plantery size.

In Alastair Reynold's Pushing Ice, the structure in which the ships are trapped is engineered and at the end it is indicated that its size is immense (possibly light hours in scale).
AnswerKenntnis:
How about the "Fleet of Worlds" - the home planets of the Pierson's Puppeteer race. Consisting of the actual homeworld, called "Hearth", and its agricultural worlds, arranged in a pentagonal Klemperer rosette. and accelerated to 80% of light speed by inertialess drives.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the Cyberiad from Stanis┼éaw Lem someone constructs a giant robot out of nearly all the matter in the Universe. The whole story is quite tongue-in-cheek, but it might still qualify.
AnswerKenntnis:
I voted for the dyson sphere as being the biggest realistic. If you want something that's not as big but maybe more realistic - then the culture ships from the iain banks books. Ships that are miles long, housing millions of people, other ships and capable of building other ships.
AnswerKenntnis:
Perhaps not the biggest, but the computers in David Zindells A Requiem for Homo Sapiens trilogy, The Broken God being the first, the computers are truly vast covering 300k planets with each planet computer associated with a star to power it. The plot deals with people being vastened from normal humans into each of these computers, and some of the vast computer sentient entities being de-vastened into a childs toy, after being destroyed. A trully excellent series of books worth a read, about the ascendency of man, written in Zindells poetic language.
AnswerKenntnis:
The structure simply known as The City or the Megastructure in Tsutomu Nihei's Blame! appears to outclass everything else here.

It's a classically engineered structure (i.e. no quantum "there's an entire universe inside!" cop-outs) that extends roughly spherically outwards from the center of the solar system to a point at or beyond the orbit of Jupiter. It's constantly expanding, being built by out-of-control AIs. It's multi-leveled ("the megastructure" nominally refers to the constructs separating the levels but is also shorthand for the whole thing sometimes) and so the theoretical "habitable volume" is enormous, although in practice few areas have oxygen, or gravity, or lack of killer androids, or etc.

Nominally this makes it a Dyson sphere, or rather a series of Dyson spheres, but I'm not aware of any other work of fiction that portrays a Dyson sphere this large. It also has some elements of a Matrioshka brain, as some kind of computer network appears to run throughout it.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think we all are forgetting "The Death Star" here and ultimate weapon as big as a few hundred suns.
AnswerKenntnis:
Allen Steele's book Hex describes a Dyson sphere, but made of hexagons, 1000 miles (K?  I forget, but 1000 of the units) long, 100 miles wide, each as a discrete habitat.

Ya, I know Dyson spheres have been mentioned, but this is an interesting example of it.  36 Trillion biopods (each arm of each hex).  

Other Dyson Sphere example might be in Roger Mcbride Allen's Hunted Earth series (alas only two books, but great ones!) 


Ring of Charon 
Shattered Sphere
AnswerKenntnis:
Isn't there a space-opera series where an (obviously) disappeared alien race litteraly carved a galaxy ? I even remember there are some kind of tourists visiting this galaxy ... No in fact, i remember, it's not a galaxy, it's a chain of stars, linked each one to the other by ... a typical Ancient Disappeared Race means. Accordint to timday's excellent comment, it's the kiimt homeworld in Night's Dawn hyper-huge trilogy of Peter F Hamilton.
AnswerKenntnis:
The Magog World Ship is quite big, i can't find any facts about its size, but it's a solar system with at least 11 planets..
AnswerKenntnis:
In the Perry Rhodan Multiverse we have


The Loolandre is the heart of the endless armada with a diameter of at least four light years
The Tiefenland is a discworld with a diameter of one light year (and a transmitter dome every light second)
AnswerKenntnis:
How about The Stone from Greg Bear's EON. The description of it is that it was endless, bigger on the inside than the outside; a hollowed-out asteroid connected TARDIS-fashion to The Way, an cylindrical artificial space a dozen kilometers in diameter and infinite length.


  In the sequel, Eternity, it is revealed that the Way is not actually infinite; it ends by opening up into a small universe (finite but unbounded). The length of the Way is difficult to calculate from the book, but since it takes the Geshels at least several thousand years of subjective time to travel it at very nearly the speed of light, a rough estimate of a billion light-years would be very conservative.
AnswerKenntnis:
Starting in the second season of Lexx, Mantrid created a von Neumann probe drone of his own arm.  Eventually Mantrid is tricked into summoning all of the Mantrid drones, which at this point had consumed all of the matter in Mantrid's original universe, to one place.

The Mantrid drones collected all of the matter in a universe and artificially created a big crunch when Mantrid summoned them to the same location.
QuestionKenntnis:
What was the origin of Star Trek's Borg?
qn_description:
Was there any explanation of the origin of the Borg from Star Trek?

I've seen most of the TV shows but not read any books - is it explained there?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
I understand that there's no definite answer but on Memory-Alpha it says that Borg was the product of cybernetic augmentation of living organisms that was advanced to the point where they ceased to be the species they were before that and became Borg. The hive mind probably started as the means of communication and sharing the information (just like the internet) and as species relied on it more and more (just like we are on the internet) they gradually lost the capability of functioning without it (just like we... well, maybe not yet :) and became the hive mind.
AnswerKenntnis:
This was covered in David Mack's Star Trek: Destiny series of books. Whether this is considered canon or not is up for debate, but it's certainly a good story. To summarize very briefly, there exist a very advanced and xenophobic race known as the Caeliar, and their technology is such that they've replaced their bodies (which presumably were biological in nature as our own are) with particles called catoms. These catoms allow them all sorts of abilities. However, they require an energy source, one of which is located in the centre of each Caeliar city (/spaceship).

An event occured whereby one of these cities was destroyed and sucked into the distant past. The demise of this city's power source meant that the survivors required an energy source. Over time, they became more and more desperate until essentially their concious mind (and morals, etc) was lost and their catoms' "instinct" (for want of a better word) took over in order to secure their survival. Over time, the Borg were born: the Borg nanoprobes are a severely warped and damaged (and less capable) version of the Caeliar catoms.

I won't spoil the books by explaining what beccomes of the Borg... and I have rather butchered the story there. Well worth a read of them to make proper sense of this.
AnswerKenntnis:
There's an interesting theory involving the Voyager 6 probe (V'Ger) mentioned on Memory Alpha: http://memory-alpha.org/wiki/Voyager_6#Apocrypha


  "Star Trek: Legacy" presented the theory that the 20th century Borg civilization was a peaceful race. When V'Ger encountered them, they studied its programming, repaired the probe, and sent it on its task. When V'Ger returned to the Sol system it could not find its creator, but "a biological infestation." The probe returned to the Borg homeworld and joined with them, and its programming propagated throughout the Collective. Something of a civil war broke out. Massive amounts of knowledge, including the location of Earth, were lost in the resulting conflict, and the Borg of the 24th century were born. 


I think it's a bit of a stretch, but interesting considering that nothing is still known about the machine planet.
AnswerKenntnis:
Speculation: In Star Trek: Voyager when they first meet the Borg, it is stated (maybe by Janeway) that the Borg only obtain new information by assimilation. They do not (or are not capable) of doing their own research (which is why Voyager is escorted across Borg space). I would assume that the Borg were at some point a primitive life form (it is not clear to me what the Borg actually are) which through practiced evolution through assimilation - and at some point they became technologically advanced (and therefore worthy of the name)
AnswerKenntnis:
Star Trek: First Contact has a lot of general information about how the Borg became what they are today; basically, they began as a humanoid race seeking physical perfection, which they explored by developing and then integrating mechanical elements into their physiology. Eventually, the more mechanical elements came to dominate the biological. The Borg Queen states openly while interrogating Data that she considers the Borg's biggest weakness to be their remaining vestiges of humanity (humanoidity?), something that the Borg constantly strive to "transcend" as they assimilate and adapt (in contrast to Data, a sentient artifice who seeks to become more human). The movie however does not provide any specifics of timeline or of the name of the original race that became the seed of the Borg Collective. It seems they themselves have forgotten it as unimportant.
AnswerKenntnis:
There is no EVIDENCE, but its believed that the Delta Quadrant is the origin of the Borg Collective. Neither is their biological origin. Its believed that they were an humanoid advanced civilization who grew tired of not being perfect. They want to achieve perfection, so they started assimilating species. The Vaadwaur were one of the first to encounter the borg, the borg had only assimilated only a handful of star systems.
QuestionKenntnis:
Is it true that The Doctor can only regenerate 12 times?
qn_description:
Because if it is, the series won't last much longer. The current Doctor is number 11 - that only leaves two more, right?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Here's what is supposedly the official word. From Doctor Who is now immortal, reveals the BBC: Edict that Time Lords can regenerate only 12 times before they die has been quietly ditched:


  He travels through time and space, saves the Earth, and has millions of fans all over the world. But as every "Whovian" knows, the Doctor cannot last for ever: Time Lords are able to regenerate only 12 times before they die.
  
  Fans have always thought that the 13th doctor would be the last, thanks to a 1976 Doctor Who episode, The Deadly Assassin, featuring Tom Baker as the Doctor in his fourth incarnation, and revealing for the first time the regeneration limit. But a passing comment in a children's television programme later this month is set to rewrite history and cast the Doctor, iconic hero of the world's most successful and longest-running science fiction series, as immortal. 


In the Sarah Jane Adventures (yes, that was the old friend), in the episode "The Death of the Doctor". The Doctor is asked how many times he can regenerate, and replies 


  Five hundred and seven


Recently (always considering that in the Whoniverse the word "recently" is very flexible), Moffat stated he had a plan to skirt the regeneration issue.
AnswerKenntnis:
This is Doctor Who we're talking about.  These are the retcon experts.  Asking Doctor Who to be internally consistent is equivalent to expecting Douglas Adams to be logical.  Literally in some cases, since Douglas Adams wrote for Doctor Who for a while.

Believe me, if they wish to continue past Doctor 13, they will find a way.  And it will make some sort of absurd, twisted sense.  Or not, depending on the mood of the writer at the time.
AnswerKenntnis:
It has come up from time to time that the 12 regeneration limit may be some artificial, Time Lord Council imposed thing.

eg. In the Five Doctors, the council convinces the Master to help them out by offering to give him regeneration, as he had no regeneration energy left and was in the Trakenite body of Nyssa's father, Tremas.

From the wikipedia article:


  "This is the first time it is
  suggested that a new cycle of
  regenerations can be bestowed on a
  person (in this case the Master),
  implying that it could be possible to
  circumvent the twelve-regeneration
  limit established in The Deadly
  Assassin."
AnswerKenntnis:
There have actually been three official canon answers:

Season 6 (1969), "The War Games": Indefinitely, "barring accidents".
Season 14 (1976), "The Deadly Assassin": 13.
The Sarah Jane Adventures (2010), "Death of the Doctor": 507.
AnswerKenntnis:
That rule comes from one story (if I recall correctly "The Deadly Assassin"). But it looks like the writers will change it if needed: http://www.radiotimes.com/blogs/1062-doctor-who-regenerate-immortal-12-times-13-lives/
AnswerKenntnis:
The average Time Lord can only regenerate 12 times - this has been pretty clearly stipulated in stories such as The Deadly Assassin and Mawdryn Undead, from the 70s and the 80s... no matter what the Doctor may flippantly say in, e.g., Death of the Doctor.  

However, there are certainly precedents for cheating death beyond the 12th regeneration.  The Master, in The Keeper of Traken, was in his final regeneration and resembled a decomposing corpse, but managed to steal the body of Nyssa's father Tremas and use a power called "the Source" to enter into a new cycle of regenerations.  A few decades on, he's still going strong, in several new bodies.

It seems clearly that if the Doctor Who franchise is still going strong while the 13th actor is in the lead role, they will find some way of giving our hero his own new cycle of regenerations.  It's Doctor Who - anything can, and usually does, happen!
AnswerKenntnis:
Based on the recent episode "Let's Kill Hitler", we see River Song giving her remaining regeneration energy to save the Doctor's life, so that may have prolonged the regeneration limit. That's very plausible, considering in "Silence in the Libray"/"Forest of the Dead", River Song physically died. We now know that she can regenerate, but she didn't/wasn't able to. I believe, IMHO, she couldn't have regenerated because she gave it to the Doctor.
AnswerKenntnis:
First, we should establish the count of used regenerations.  In the episode The Time of the Doctor, it's confirmed that the Doctor's Meta-Crisis regeneration did count as a regeneration.  Between this regeneration, and the recently-revealed (Night of the Doctor/Day of the Doctor) 'War Doctor' regeneration, Matt Smith, who we previously called the 11th Doctor, was in fact the 13th regeneration of that character.  The math works out that the original Doctor was his original face, so the 2nd Doctor is the 1st regeneration and so on.  This then means that the 13th Doctor is his 12th and final natural regeneration.

However, just as they did for The Master, the Time Lords granted The Doctor a fresh set of regenerations (The Time of the Doctor).  So as the '11th' regenerates, he turns into Peter Capaldi, the first of a new set of 12 regenerations.  As of The Time of the Doctor, the Doctor now has 11 more regenerations left.

Largely copied from my answer on Movies & TV.SE
AnswerKenntnis:
Originally, the doctor has only 12 regenerations, but in the episode let's kill hitler, melody, who has already regenerated twice, gives the the doctor her 10 remaining regenerations, leving him with 22. He then gives her one when she breaks her arm, leaving him with 21 regenerations, 22 lives, and 11 more Doctors. That means we're only half way done with the doctor. At this rate, the show will end in 2063 at least, and by that time we may have ourselves a real doctor!
AnswerKenntnis:
I was always under the impression that The Doctor would have 12 regenerations. Like the hours on a clock. Hence *time*lord.
AnswerKenntnis:
The 12 regenerations is an artificial limitation probably created by elder Time Lord hierarchies, who knows how long ago. Just watch The Five Doctors, in this story the Time Lords offer The Master a new set of regenerations.

Also, if he could only have 13 incarnations the Doctor would more than likely dire a very young man. The Time Lord lifespan is around 7000 years. The Doctor as far as we know is only around 1,100 years old, because of his lifestyle he's running through his regenerations at an astronomical pace. This always makes me wonder why in the world would NuWho Doctors always claim to be so old. Yes, to humans and most aliens he's old, but to his own people and what he sees as normal for Time Lords, he's a young'un.
AnswerKenntnis:
No one's mentioned Trial of a Time Lord, where the Master says that somewhere between around the "12th and final regeneration", the Doctor becomes the Valeyard and will seek to undo everything after Colin Baker.
AnswerKenntnis:
River did give him the rest of her regeneration energy because she's going to the library anyway but not just that he told clyde that he has unlimited the show is so poplar they'll keep him going the doctor is a little energizer bunny he'll keep on going.
AnswerKenntnis:
According to the official Doctor Who Magazine, which I bought right after they announced Matt Smith, Timelords can only surpass the 12 regenerations if they do the time lord council a favor, and since the tenth doctor killed them all, he's out of luck. They probably will pull the "River gave up her regenerations" thing, but she did so to counter the poison.
AnswerKenntnis:
It is 13 regenerations. I got a book for Christmas, as I am completely obsessed. It says there can only be 13 but it is possible one can be forged through artificial means. However, these artificial means are most likely only found on guess which destroyed planet. I'm sure Moffat will come up with something, though, he always does. By the way, the fact of regeneration was not even there until Hartnell couldn't do the show anymore, by then the show was way too popular to cancel, they didn't think much of it when it first started, but then regeneration was an option. They made the 13 rule because anyone saying that the show would last 50 years would be put in a madhouse.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the latest series episode 'Let's kill Hitler', River poisoned him and he went into the Tardis and it said 'regeneration disabled'. I presumed that meant that he ran out of regenerations. And when River was in the hospital, I thought Amy said that she had used up ALL remaining regenerations to save him, not just the last of her energy. So I was under the impression that both River and the Doctor have no more regenerations left. But I'm probably wrong.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the audiobook "Ring Of Steel," the Doctor makes a comment about only being young twelve times.
AnswerKenntnis:
The current Doctor (Matt Smith) is believed to be the 13th incarnation of the Doctor so he has apparently expended his regenerations because a Timelord can only regenerate twelve times.

That creates a problem because notionally the line of regenerations ends with the current Doctor and handing out extra regenerations willy-nilly would clearly be a cheat. So how can there be another Doctor to follow the current one? There certainly can be, but only if the forthcoming Doctor is not dependent on a regeneration or if the current widely accepted understanding of the Doctor's history is imperfect.
QuestionKenntnis:
In Star Trek - What's the Point of the Transporter Room?
qn_description:
I hope this isn't a silly question but I've been watching TNG and this bothers me.

The transporter 'pad' area is relatively small.  As a guess, maybe 12 people can fit on it.  But the vast majority of times it's being used by 2-3 people.

However, the transporter is able to beam people from anywhere on the ship to anywhere (within some distance I presume).  It's fairly common for them to perform a transport directly to the bridge.

So, why is there an actual room?  

If a three man away team is to beam down to the surface of a planet - why do they have to walk all the way to the transporter room, then stand on the pad to get down there?  Why not simply beam them from where they are, to the surface.  The ship's computer is able to locate anyone on board.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Of course for all things Star Trek Memory Alpha has the answers.

Regarding transporter pads:


  The transporters installed on Earth's NX-class starships featured one large circular pad that took up the entire platform. It was large enough to transport two to three people, provided they stood close together. 
  
  By the 23rd century, Federation transporter platforms featured multiple independent pads, typically six in a hexagonal configuration. One- and two-pad platforms were also available. 
  
  This became something of a standard layout for Federation transporters well into the next century. As an example, the platforms used on board Galaxy-class starships had the familiar six individual pads, with an over-sized pad (in the center of the platform) that could handle small cargo. 


Why make them walk to the transporter pad?


  The outer hull of a starship incorporated a number of emitter pads for the transporter beam.


At least initially they created a beam from the pad in the transporter room, which would then travel through a beam created from the hull. There wasn't a beam emitter that pointed towards the inside of the ship. As a result of this:


  In the mid 2260s, beaming from a transporter pad to a location within the same vessel was a very risky proposition. The limitations of the technology at that time made it highly probable that any error would result in the subject rematerializing within a bulkhead, deck, or other structure. 


Eventually they resolved these technical issues: 


  By at least 2268, limitations in pattern buffer and targeting scanner technology had been sufficiently overcome that it was now possible to transport from one location directly to another without the need to re-materialize the subject in between. (TOS: "A Piece of the Action") In the 24th century, this operation was enabled and controlled by the site-to-site transport interlocks. (TNG: "Brothers") 
  
  Site-to-site transport holds the matter stream in the pattern buffer while the ACB was re-targeted. Afterward, the matter stream was redirected to the new location and normal re-materialization was carried out. 
  
  This technique could only be utilized when sufficient energy was available to the transporters; all normal transporter limitations would still apply.


Based on the last part they probably where expected to normally conserve energy. It is typically in emergency situations that you see people using site-to-site transports (such as to sick bay).
AnswerKenntnis:
Aside from cultural formality and security concerns(especially with unknown/hostile races): '*Why use the door when you can use the window?', there were also energy concerns:


  The main operator can likewise send those in transport anywhere with ease. A possible explanation for this is put forward in the Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Technical Manual, where such site-to-site transports would probably use twice as much energy as would be required for transport to or from the transporter room itself, since the subject would have to be beamed to the transporter, stored, then shunted to their destination.
AnswerKenntnis:
The pad acts as a relay.

When a character is on a planet and wants to be transported directly to the bridge, they beam him to the transporter room buffer, and instead of materializing him there, they materialize he in the bridge.

That's why sometimes they don't use the transporter room.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why would the Force become so mysterious and unrecognized after only 20 years?
qn_description:
I always wondered why Admiral Motti and Governor Tarkin in the movie "A New Hope" (IV) insinuate that the Force is an old, dead religion?

Tarkin:


  The Jedi are extinct, their fire has gone out of the universe. You, my friend, are all that's left of their religion.


Motti:


  Don't try to frighten us with your sorcerous ways, Lord Vader. Your sad devotion to that ancient religion has not helped you conjure up the stolen data tapes, or given you clairvoyance enough to find the rebels' hidden fortress...


Tarkin, as human, must be around age 50, so, if in Episode IV Luke is about 20, when he was just born at the end of Episode III, Tarkin must have been around 30, so a perfect young man in a Galaxy that used to know Jedis, Jedi Council, Force etc..

Why, 20 years later, he just looks like someone who never saw a Jedi/Sith?
Also, besides from Force sensitives (Obi-Wan, Yoda, Vader, the Emperor), nobody else looks like they ever heard of the Force ... that's really weird, isn't it?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Jedi were declared traitors to the Republic. It was politically expedient for both the state AND individuals (especially government people) to relegate them to as far back in the mind as possible.

It's like someone discussing monarchy in Soviet Russia in 1938. Yeah, it was merely 20 years since the Revolution. But...
AnswerKenntnis:
It's important to remember that the Jedi have always been strange and mysterious. Even in the Old Republic, with the Jedi Council in its prime, probably 99.9999% of the population never got anywhere near a Jedi, and even fewer ever experienced a Jedi using Force powers. It's likely that the 30-year-old Tarkin would have been just as dismissive of of the Force as the 50-year-old version was. It's basic human psychology: if we do not know something, we either fear it or we ridicule it.
AnswerKenntnis:
It's not really that weird.  Vader is the only known person at that time who is either Jedi or Sith.  The Emperor had never, as far as I know, announced himself to the galaxy as a Sith Lord, maintaining an under-cover status.  Yoda was in exile on Dagoba, and Obi Wan was in exile on Tatooine.  For 20 or so years.  So it's very probable that people had assumed the Jedi way extinct, and that Darth Vader was the last remaining user of The Force.
AnswerKenntnis:
Setting aside the "Because George Lucas was making it up as he went along" angle, here are a couple of thoughts:


In our world, there are a number of religions still practiced today which could justly be called "ancient."  "Ancient" means "going back hundreds of years," not "unheard of for hundreds of years."  Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism, and many other religions are ancient.
As for the statements of Motti and Tarkin, I think we could easily picture some of Stalin's lieutenants saying similar types of things about Christianity, even though it had only been two or three decades since the Russian Revolution.  Motti and Tarkin had fully embraced the new reality, in which the Jedi belief system didn't seem to matter anymore.
AnswerKenntnis:
Your average person would not have dealt with the Jedi regularly. They weren't rock stars that paraded around constantly in the public eye. Even Nute Gunray asks Hask, "Have you ever encountered a Jedi before?" to which the Vice-Roy of the Trade Federation replies "No". Even in the days of the Old Republic, high dignitaries had often only heard of the Jedi at best, and certainly had never even seen one.

We see a lot of the Jedi, and they seem to be everywhere in the Star Wars universe, because those are movies/books about them. If a movie were made about moisture farmers on Tatooine, chances are there would be no mention of the Jedi whatsoever.

Finally, I think people tend to underestimate 20 years. Do you clearly remember things that happened even 5 years ago that you didn't directly deal with? Now make that 20 years, and pretend all records of those events were destroyed, people have been brainwashed, a new, radically different order has been established, History has been rewritten, etc. Not to mention, a single publicly-visible person (the Emperor didn't seem very visible) is the only remaining evidence that such people ever lived. It's not so hard to believe that nobody believes the Jedi are anything more than a legend.
AnswerKenntnis:
Tarkin underestimates the power of the force because he has not had to deal with it in 20 years. Tarkin and Motti both believe themselves to be among the most powerful beings in the galaxy and would like nothing more than to put the Emperor's Enforcer in his place -beneath them. One strategy is to belittle those things that matter to such a person.
AnswerKenntnis:
I don't see what the contradiction is.   You are inferring the wrong thing from the fact that Motti calls it "ancient" and that Tarkin says Vader "is all that's left".   These two things are independent.   "Ancient" and "dead" doesn't mean long dead.

"Ancient" refers to the origin of the religion, just like Judaism and Hinduism are "ancient". You could have hundreds or thousands of Jedi for thousands of years, and that makes the religion "ancient".   You can then wipe out all the Jedi, and as of the next day, it is an ancient dead religion.
AnswerKenntnis:
The impression I received of Jedi, even in the second trilogy (phantom menace) is that the Jedi's hayday is long gone. They aren't seen as a strong political party. Yes they are trusted by a political party, or a few royal dignities, but their function is as advisors and body guards, not special force wizards using their powers all the time.

The audience is well aware of the council, and the younglings and padawan who are slain, and the massive blow test to the Jedi order. Compare that to the impression most high nobles had of the order: a council and some knights, maybe one or two trainees, hardly a thriving group, and even so one that rarely exercised their powers.

I would compare it to Buddhist monks; as far as I'm aware there ae one or two monasteries in the far east that still practice this religion, when in truth I imagine thee are hundreds I've never seen or heard of.

My point being, Motti and Tarkin may well have considered the Jedi and sith orders to be ancient, dead religions even twenty years ago.
AnswerKenntnis:
It would serve the Emperor's interests tremendously for most people to think of the Force as ancient hocus-pocus.

Though he did his best to purge the galaxy of Jedi, surely he'd know that more Force-sensitives were being born every day. The best way to manage that potential threat would be for them to grow up in an environment in which Force manipulation was viewed as a crank belief.

Though I don't believe it's canonical, I can easily see Palpatine subtly encouraging this view after the Jedi were largely gone and not worrying about the cognitive dissonance experienced by the very few people who ever witnessed him or Vader using the Force. In fact, it's so obvious, it's something I wouldn't be surprised to learn was in fact canonical or to see become canon some day.

It was effective! Luke Skywalker, at the near-height of his Force powers during the Rebellion, was probably less impressive in his manipulation of the Force than Obi-Wan was while still a Padawan (remember his deft lightsaber retrieval while battling Maul and compare to Luke's strained retrieval in the ice cave). And Leia remained quite clumsy with the Force years after Palpatine's death at the Battle of Endor.
AnswerKenntnis:
Without saying "Bad writing", my initial response would be to say that the Emperor and Vader have only grown more powerful as time has gone by, whilst the other remaining Jedi, Kenobi and Yoda, have grown weaker. It was Vader and the Emperor's goal to eradicate all traces of the Jedi, both as a people and a memory. Perhaps they were able to exude their own powers over the force to actually change the way all intelligent creatures remember certain events.

Heck, but if that were true, they could have just made everyone agree that the Empire was super great and there was no need for a rebellion.
AnswerKenntnis:
It's also worth noting that there's a disinformation campaign going on. Vader is not in fact a Jedi at this point in the series: he renounced them to become a Sith Lord. Yet even extremely high-ranking officials in the Empire act as though he is, going so far as to call him such, and he does not correct them. Odds are, these officials honestly believe that he is still a Jedi: Vader and the Emperor are just about the only people left who could tell them otherwise, and the rest are so deep in hiding that even if they know enough to call Vader a Sith, they don't dare.

This could serve two purposes. Vader may well be the most feared individual in the Empire, and continuing to associate him with the Jedi helps establish that the Jedi, and any who would attempt to learn about them, should be feared and distrusted. It also helps to hide the existence of the Sith: they have not always been a secretive order, but at the time of the movies they certainly are. Yet Vader's powers still need to be explained to the people somehow, and his old religion, now a convenient scapegoat, makes for good camouflage.
AnswerKenntnis:
Basically because while the Jedi order was well known and famous, most people never met a Jedi or saw them ever do anything with the force. It's akin to the bible and the old testament where, since no one has ever seen God do any of the old testament type mircales, most people have relegated it all to nothing but myth, stories or compelte fabrications. 
So it's the same with the Jedi, the Jedi order and the force. 

Same is also true for the Shaolin, chi and chi-gung, because today there are so few practitioners that can really use their chi, have the kinds of skills, power and abilities that you would see in old school kung-fu movies, and those that can do such things do not advertise or show off... most think that they never existed and that they were mere exaggerations or stories, myths,..not real. 

Much of what goes on in the Star Wars universe is taken from both the history of the Shaolin monks and the biblical prophets, so that is why I use those parralells. 

The Jedi were also considered to be traitors to the republic and the Palpatine and Vader stopped at nothing to wipe out as many records of their existence as possible. Also, Palpatine was waging a massive propaganda campaign against the Jedi during the Clone Wars. After order 66, anyone even remotely having anything to do with the Jedi were labeled as traitors and jailed or killed, so this scared people into simply forgetting anything they kenw about the Jedi, do not discuss them, read about them, etc. Those that were older and possibly had seen or met a Jedi would know better, but the vast majority would be taught via propaganda, state controlled media, edited text books and the like, to beleive that they were nothing more than a myth and legend. 

Even on Obra-Skai, which was the largest repository of knowledge in the galaxy, most of the records of the Jedi, along with their knowledge, training techniques and more were wiped out. Luke was essentially a walking library of knowledge of the Jedi techniques, the only one known to exist at the time. 

Later on, Luke eventually found the Chunthor', which was a mobile Jedi training ship that he found crashed on Dathomir. He was eventually able to recover training disks that the witches of Dathomir had kept since Yoda went there over 300 years prior. These are things that Luke would have learned from Yoda had he not disobeyed Yoda and Obi-wan and left for Bespin in an attempt to save Han and Leia. 

So there was definitely a massive concerted effort to destroy all memory of the Jedi from the entire galaxy, no doubt greatly contributing to most people beliving that they never really existed.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why is Sauron called "the Necromancer"?
qn_description:
During the time period of The Hobbit, a character is mentioned called the Necromancer.  Radagast even (in the movie) specifically states that the Necromancer can "summon the spirits of the dead."  (It's been a while since I read the book so I don't know if this exact phrasing is used there, but given the name it seems reasonable.)  This character is later revealed to the Sauron.

Since when can Sauron summon the spirits of the dead?  He can extend life ad infinitum, like Gollum, and he can twist people into half-alive monsters, like the Ringwraiths, and he himself seems impossible to kill so long as the One Ring remains, but I can't recall ever actually seeing him "summon" something that was once fully dead.  In fact, the only character I remember doing that was actually Aragorn, though he merely commanded them and didn't raise them himself.

Is this just an unfounded rumor about the power in Dol Guldur, some hushed-whisper nightmare that isn't actually an accurate description, or is there a reason he is called the Necromancer?

It seems like if Sauron could actually resurrect the dead, what little chance Middle Earth had of defeating his hordes would be long, long gone...
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
First of all, the Necromancer was always intended by Tolkien to be Sauron (who was at the time named Th├╗).  The most explicit evidence is to be found in the History of the Hobbit, when the Necromancer is first mentioned, and reads:


  "Don't be absurd" said the wizard. "That is a job quite beyond the powers of all the dwarves, if they could be all gathered together again from the four corners of the world. And anyway his castle stands no more and he is flown to another darker place - Beren and Tin├║viel broke his power, but that is quite another story."


(My emphasis)

There's also reference in the Lay of Leithian ("Men called him Th├╗...In glamoury
that necromancer held his hosts"), as well as in the pre-LotR Letter 19 ("even Sauron the terrible peeped over the edge") - of course the full concept of the Rings of Power only emerged during the writing of LotR, but other ideas - such as Sauron's survival beyond the First Age, the Fall of Numenor (where Sauron is explicitly identified as being the same character as Th├╗), the Last Alliance, Sauron's lairs in Mordor and Mirkwood, the name "Sauron" itself - had already emerged and gone through several revisions before the Hobbit was even published.



As for why he's called a "Necromancer", the most obvious early explanation comes in the quoted lines from the Lay of Leithian, and I'll give them again in full:


  Men called him Th├╗, and as a god
  in after days beneath his rod
  bewildered bowed to him, and made
  his ghastly temples in the shade.
  Not yet by men enthralled adored,
  now was he Morgoth's mightiest lord,
  Master of Wolves, whose shivering howl
  for ever echoed in the hills, and foul
  enchantments and dark sigaldry
  did weave and wield. In glamoury
  that necromancer held his hosts
  of phantoms and of wandering ghosts...


This however does nothing much more than establish that Sauron/Th├╗ was called a Necromancer, but doesn't go into much detail about what exactly he did.  For that we need to look to a later text, published in HoME 10 (Morgoth's Ring) and again I'll quote in full (with some added emphasis):


  It is therefore a foolish and perilous thing, besides being a wrong deed forbidden justly by the appointed Rulers of Arda, if the Living seek to commune with the Unbodied, though the houseless may desire it, especially the most unworthy among them. For the Unbodied, wandering in the world, are those who at the least have refused the door of life and remain in regret and self-pity. Some are filled with bitterness, grievance, and envy. Some were enslaved by the Dark Lord and do his work still, though he himself is gone. They will not speak truth or wisdom. To call on them is folly. To attempt to master them and to make them servants of one own's will is wickedness. Such practices are of Morgoth; and the necromancers are of the host of Sauron his servant.


So there we have it: Sauron/Th├╗ communed with spirits of the dead, mastered them and made them his servants.
AnswerKenntnis:
Well, out of universe the answer is pretty clear: at the time Tolkien wrote The Hobbit, the character of Sauron as it appears in The Lord of the Rings didn't exist. It wasn't until later, as he was conceiving the story of The One Ring, that Tokien decided to retrofit the events of The Hobbit as a prequel.

To be very pedantic: the character that would eventually become Sauron existed in Tolkien's unpublished writings about the history of Middle Earth, and that's who Tolkien had in mind when he wrote The Hobbit. But the character would undergo a lot of changes between The Hobbit and Lord of the Rings, including his name and his entire backstory with the Rings of Power, which is why the descriptions of him in the two novels don't mesh very well. In The Hobbit, The Necromancer is merely supposed to represent a vague threat from the world outside of Bilbo's experience, to give the reader the sense that the story is part of something bigger.

In-universe, it's probably in large part due to people not actually knowing that it was Sauron, but merely seeing a powerful being capable of things that one would normally associate with the wizards. Necromancer, in this sense, is probably just a general name for "mysterious but evil-looking magical guy".

As far as summoning the spirits of the dead, we have no indication that Sauron can literally summon spirits, so it's unlikely that's what Radagast actually meant. He may just be repeating a rumour, since that sounds like the kind of thing that someone might say if they saw a ringwraith working for Sauron but didn't recognize it. It's also possible that Radagast is being figurative, similar to his declaration that the Morgul blade he found in Dol Goldur was "not from the world of the living." His reference to "spirits of the dead" may be a poetic way of saying that the Necromancer is digging up ancient magic or beings that the Istari had thought long-since gone away.
AnswerKenntnis:
So,in these kinds of questions ("Why this name ...?") there is always what the author himself may or may not say that might explain the name, and then there is the inner logic of his choice, often unexpressed, for why a particular name might be given.  As for the latter then, I think it is pretty clear that the name Necromancer is meant to put us in mind of two things: 


that Sauron, tho a Maia, nevertheless lost his body as a result of the destruction of Numenor (there is some apparent confusion here as Tolkien is clear that he last his body and yet at the same time, following his defeat during the last Alliance of Men and Elves, the One Ring was "cut from his finger"), and thus was something like a wraith himself.  Additionally, 
Sauron was lord of the Nine and they surely are considered "wraiths" themselves.  These two corresponding facts, that he himself is a wraith and that he commands wraiths, lends an inner logic to his being named the Necromancer (and this is true whether or not the White Council understood that logic and so could identify him as Sauron).
AnswerKenntnis:
Perhaps not what you are after, but a necromancer is actually just a being who communicates with the dead. Mancer, the suffix is Greek for divination, which, used with Necro is divining info from the dead, normally about future events. So if they were saying it accurately, which in all fairness they almost certainly were not, he would call up spirits and they would just kinds be chilling, talking lots. Not a great army.
AnswerKenntnis:
Just would to add Sauron could raise the dead, because he could tap into the unseen world and somehow tie it with physical.

Other things Tolkien specified were like this are the Barrow-Blades or the swords meant to kill or wound Ring-Wraiths (Nazgul Sauron Servants), Also some characters like Tom Bombadil could actually bring back to dead evil spirits or dispell them at will, Aragorn Commanded them and muster the men of dunharrow (dead).

Also Dol Guldur, means tower of sorcery his reach is even nature twisting, animals go insane and evil creatures appears.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why did Darth Vader die in Return of the Jedi?
qn_description:
At the end of Episode VI, Luke had beaten Darth Vader in a duel, but didn't seem to injure the latter critically ΓÇö all Luke did was to sever Vader's right hand, which was a prosthetic to begin with. So, why did Vader die after he had thrown the emperor off the deck and saved Luke?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
To add to what jwenting said, you can clearly see Vader hit by the emperor strikes.
This most probably destroyed a part of his suit which he needs as a survival system as Luke said to him when he wanted to remove his helmet.

You can check on this HD video.
Here are some screenshots for the proof of the hits.
AnswerKenntnis:
Vader was probably mortally wounded by the blasts of energy released during the fight, if I remember correctly he was hit multiple times by the Emperor.
As he depended on his suit for survival, and it's conceivable the systems in that suit could become overloaded by that energy release, he could possibly be killed by blasts that the healthier, younger, Skywalker could (barely) survive.
AnswerKenntnis:
Vader's suit was a life support suit - he couldn't survive outside of it.

The long combat with Luke pushed him towards his physical limits - he is at least 20 years older than Luke, and with very poor health.  He'd been drawing heavily on the Force to keep himself moving.

He was injured - the suit was damaged when the cybernetics in his right arm were damaged.

THEN he suffered the extreme emotional turmoil of seeing his son being tortured to death.

When he intervened to stop it (by killing the person who had been his mentor for 20+ years, who had saved his life, and who had helped him save the galaxy - from his POV, at least) he was subjected to several seconds of sustained Force Lightning.

This played merry hell with his already-damaged suit.

The man was beaten into the ground, had to choose between his greatest friend's life and his son's, was electrocuted, and had decades-old mental wounds torn open.

It's not surprising that he died, it's surprising that he lived as long as he did.
AnswerKenntnis:
"Did you ever hear the tale of Darth Plagueis?" The Supreme chancellor (Palpatine) asks Anakin Skywalker this question during the civic performance from his VIP box seat? Thus, preempting a response by Anakin. This is turn sets the stage for the story of a Sith Lord that was so powerful he could even escape death. 

Certainly, the suit allowed Vader to live and it's beyond dispute the suit was damaged from the Emperor's force lighting assault on Luke that also rippled through Vader. But I return to Palpatine's original question from SW III and the dark side power his story revealed - the ability to escape even death, and "if we work together (to save Padame)..." These are vital dialogue clues. 

I believe Vader's death is not as simple as some would argue. The Force never is. Thus, the suit failure was not catastrophic. It was the Emperor's and Vader's dark side force powers that allowed Vader to thrive from the knowledge of Darth Plagueis- "If we work together"... 

Once the Emperor was removed from the equation, Vader's death was inevitable... Vader understood this all to well. It also explains why, after 20 plus years, Vader never slew Palpatine, and became the Emperor himself, which is what Sith do - if anyone has studied their history? 

This is why Vader told Luke it was too late. If it were only a matter of the suits mechanical failure though, there would have been time for Luke to get him medical aid by leaving the mask on. He was still laboring with breath. But there is more to it than that. 

It had been the dark side of the force that sustained Vader through Palpatine all along. With Vader's sudden disconnection to such power, as well as his turning back to the light side (meaning Vader would not invoke dark side force energy to sustain himself), Vader simply chose to let go... He had found his true peace. 

Thus, Vader/Anakin allowed the will of the force to prevail, and in the process fulfilled the prophecy of bringing balance to the force not in a way foreseen by either Jedi or Sith.
AnswerKenntnis:
In conjunction with the life support suit it was probably Anakin's hatred and anger fueling his Sith abilities that allowed him to sustain himself from the end of Eps3 through to Eps6. As he remembered what it was to be a true Jedi by interacting with his son (as early as tESB) that anger began to subside, compromising his Dark Side ability. When he finally died it was likely because he had made peace with himself and simply stopped wanting to live.
AnswerKenntnis:
Anakin Skywalker died the same way Mace Windu did, by powerful blasts of Palpatine's lightning. Palpatine was slowly building up to a lethal intensity while slowly torturing Luke. While his suit probably was damaged by the lightning, no one could have survived a direct hit by that lightning, as Mace Windu did not. Anakin's insides lit up on contact with the bolts, and not even for a second did that happen to Luke. Suit or not, he was mortally wounded, as the remaining tissue in his body was fatally damaged.

Nothing else contributed. It was all Palpatine's lightning.
AnswerKenntnis:
You are all missing something,  remember when the Emperor was thrown over the rail
and into the shaft Luke crawled over to Vader and his breathing was VERY labored,
someone nailed it on the head,  when he picked the emperor up he was absorbing the lightning
as Obi-Wan stated 
"He's more machine now than man" 
Machines and out of control electricity don't mix, the lightning probably blew every circuit board in his life support, I'm willing to bet the only thing that was working in his system may have been the vocals and the optics... 

My theory anyway ...:)
AnswerKenntnis:
After sustaining his life threatening injuries on Mustafar; Vader's lifesupport systems on his suit were the only thing that kept him alive. With the suit damaged beyond repair by the Emperor's force lightning it was inevitable that he would die. Even if Luke had managed to defeat the Emperor and turn Anakin Skywalker A.K.A Darth Vader back to the light side of the force, Anakin Skywalker would have been taken arrested by the Rebel Alliance as a prisoner of war. Anakin Skywalker then would have been found guilty of genocide, and crimes against the galaxy and later executed. So Anakin dying on board the second death star happened for the better good.
AnswerKenntnis:
As most others have already correctly mentioned.. vader suit was shorted out by Palpatines force lightning. Since Vaders breathing is machine controlled and because he needs to be in a pressurized chamber at all times in order for his greatly damaged lungs to be able to absorb enough oxygen to keep his biological cells functioning.. once that system is compromised, he is in real trouble. 

That is why when Vader told Luke to "Help me take this mask off" Luke said "But you'll die". 

As another mentioned, vader was not in good health due to his injuries, he was older, though that doesn't make any real difference to most Jedi, he hand was already injured from being cut off by Luke and also, in the book version of Return of the Jedi, Vader severly slammed his head against the gangplank that he cut down when he threw his saber at Luke earlier. When Luke came after him so ferociously later on.. that is when Vader slammed his head hard. Even though the helmet protected him from some of the impact, he still suffered what was basically seemed to be a severe concussion which could be why he simply had no more energy when Luke was batting him hard with the lightsaber. 

All of these things, combined with getting hit by the lightning bolts are what eventually did him in.
AnswerKenntnis:
Darth Vader is one of the mightiest Force-users in the entire series. But for all of his power, there is one thing we never ever see Darth Vader do, even in the Expanded Universe: he never once uses Force Lightning. In some cases, like the video games, his lack of this power is conspicuous in its absence. Other users of the Dark Side apply it liberally, but never him.

Why not? According to the Revenge of the Sith Visual Dictionary, the problem lay in Vader's cybernetics and armor. Essentially, his armor's electronics were not well-insulated, and thus extremely vulnerable to this power. Even if Vader were to direct the lightning at another person, there was too much of a risk that a stray arc could destroy his life-support systems. In the EU it is clear that he must have learned the basics of this power at some point, because he went on to teach it to his secret apprentice, but he never used it himself.

And this, ultimately, is what sealed his fate in Return of the Jedi. Whether or not he received a dose of Force Lightning that "should" have been lethal barely even matters, because the suit's life-support systems gave out. Even before his mask is removed, you can hear the difference in his breathing: he can gasp in a very little bit of air, but they're not the full, deep breaths you heard before. That's not enough to stay alive for very long, and even this assumes that only the respiratory functions of his armor were the only life-support systems that gave out, which isn't very likely. In short, even if nothing else had happened to him, this would have killed him.

That he stayed alive (and conscious) for as long as he did is possibly best hand-waved as him using the Force to remain among the living just long enough to conduct his final business: reconciling with his son. When that was finished, he let go.
AnswerKenntnis:
I decided to look up this myself to see what other people thought about the death of Darth Vader, and here's what I believed is what happened.

As you notice when Anakin was found burnt to a crisp with only 1 limb remaining he was given a breathing mask whilst being carried off the planet.  Not only would his exterior body have been severely burned but it's also likely that his lungs were badly damaged from breathing in the hot air and ashes when his clothes set on fire and being so close to the lava lake.  When people are pulled out of house fires they're immediately given an oxygen mask to help them breathe so their lungs aren't further damaged from breathing in hot air and ashes.

The suit appeared to be giving off gases, possibly those used in cryogenics, as well as providing him with oxygen.  My guess is that the suit was keeping his body from warming up so that he wouldn't die of shock from the severe burns he sustained (pain from such burns can be excruciating if the skin doesn't repair itself properly and can last a lifetime and be very sensitive to exposure and touch.  Severe burns cases often die from the shock.  Cooling the skin reduces the chances of burns from advancing, which is why I believe Vader's suit was cryogenic but not so much that it would put him into hibernation.)

The suit being damaged would've shut off all life support and his already damaged body was receiving full damage from force lightning when he threw the emperor off the bridge, which would've caused severe pain all over and resulting in him going into shock.

He wasn't that old himself, maybe around 40 years old give or take, so being older didn't really make a difference to him receiving damage from force lightning.  It was just that his body was too badly damaged and incapable of surviving such a powerful blow.
AnswerKenntnis:
Anakin was burnt to a crisp on Mustafar and survived for an extended period of time before Palpatine rescued him. Further evidence suggests that the Empire relied on Palpatine's extreme charisma and Force power to remain cohesive. 

The death of Palpatine broke the Imperial soldier's cohesion and they were no longer an effective fighting force. My belief is that the sudden overload of force electricity that would have killed anyone else. The Emperor was torturing Luke attempting to turn him to the dark side and then realized his resolve was too strong and was going to finish him. Vader was preparing to kill Palpatine anyway and Vader was fully capable of healing himself for a short period of time as exhibited in TESB When the officer walks into his meditation chamber.

In the expanded universe Starkiller unmasked Vader and he was fine, he just had a harder time breathing. All he needed were prosthetics
AnswerKenntnis:
"There are always two Sith, a master and an apprentice. No more, no fewer." - Yoda, episode 2. When the master dies without a successor, so does the dark side of the force that keeps Vader alive.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why Does Samwise Gamgee Call Frodo Baggins 'Mr. Frodo'?
qn_description:
I haven't finished my re-read of the Lord of the Rings trilogy (I just finished The Two Towers), but, at least in the movies, Samwise Gamgee consistently refers to Frodo Baggins as "Mr. Frodo." 

Why is this?

I noticed that Merry and Pippin call Frodo and Sam by their first names only, and vice versa, so why is Frodo bestowed with the formality of being called "Mr. Frodo"?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
There are some good answers here already, but some of the comments betray an unfamiliarity with the social system that Tolkien was portraying in the Shire.

The Shire is very specifically based on the rural English Midlands of the late 19th century that existed, although already starting to disappear, when Tolkien was growing up. In that society, there was a very clear distinction between the different classes. Frodo represents the landed gentry - not actually aristocracy, but powerful and influential as a result of owning large amounts of land. It's not made explicit, but as owner of Bag End he was almost certainly also the owner of much of the land about. The Gamgees and the Cottons may well have been his tenants.

Meanwhile, Sam is very much of the servant class. If you've seen the TV series Downton Abbey, for example, you can picture the sort of character he's meant to represent. Being "in service" was regarded at that time as a very good occupation for someone like Sam. He became very close to Frodo, and devoted to him, but the relationship was never one of equals. Sam would never have dreamed of referring to Frodo without the honorific.

Even Faramir, from a completely different society, recognizes this relationship, and tells Sam: "Do not speak before your master, whose wit is greater than yours."

After Frodo sails from Middle-Earth at the end of the book, he leaves Bag End to Sam. At that point, Sam is himself propelled into the gentry: he becomes Mayor, and founds a dynasty of his own.
AnswerKenntnis:
Recall that Sam is Frodo's gardener, and he was the son of Hamfast (the old gaffer), Bilbo's gardener before him. He grew up being the son of, and then himself, a servant of Bilbo's and Frodo's, and so likely called them "Mr. Bilbo" ("Mr. Baggins"? possible but I doubt it) and "Mr. Frodo" all his life.
AnswerKenntnis:
One of the things that JRRT explains in his other books is that he tried to explore social interaction through the use of language. So the way that Sam addresses Frodo especially reflects the fact that Sam's role is subservient, and also his presence on the journey is under the sufferance of Elrond.

The phrasing is not intended to reflect modern-day servitude, as much as it is to acknowledge Sam knows his place in Hobbit society, that being, in this case, to look after Frodo. Sam's use of language ( which, remember, was translated from the Book of Westmarch ) reflects as much his accent as his style of talking. It is not unlike someone from the West Country; if you translate their language directly, it can sound subservient.

It is always worth remembering that Tolkien's motivating force was language, so wherever he uses language, he has good, clear, and usually historical reasons for doing so.
AnswerKenntnis:
Frodo, Merry, and Pippin are all effectively landed gentry in the Shire, while Sam is just a servant / gardener. Such class distinctions were still quite prevalent in the early 20th century in Britain when the books were written.
AnswerKenntnis:
There is another relationship that Sam and Frodo represent - that of officer and enlisted man/batman that Tolkien would have been very familiar with.  In England officers were usually upper-class and enlisted not, but the enlisted man had a wealth of experience that no good officer would overlook. And the batman would take care of the officer in a physical sense as well.

Think a young lieutenant talking with a veteran Sergeant. Sure, the Sgt. must salute the Lt, but the Lt would be a fool not to respect the Sgt.  The officer tells the Sgt. what the goal is, and the Sgt. knows how to carry it out from there.  Think of all the movies where John Wayne plays a Sgt. He's not just an underling. Both are playing important roles.
AnswerKenntnis:
First of all, Sam was Frodo's gardener. Frodo kept the Ring hidden for 17 years (not in the movie). Sam grew to know his employer, respect him, and form a friendship. He valued Frodo and their friendship a lot, and looked after Frodo, considering himself Frodo's friend and guardian.

Sam is also a lot younger than Frodo, who is about 50 years of age in the book. Sam was born in 1380 of The Shire reckoning, while Frodo was born in 1368. Frodo looks young in the movie, but the ring makes the bearer stop aging (maybe the movies took this into consideration). Frodo stopped aging for 17 years while he kept the Ring hidden, similar to Bilbo.

The portrait of Sam in LOTR is of a young servant, inheriting his father's craft. Bilbo teaches Sam how to read and write. The position of Sam to the positions of Frodo, Merry and Pippin is not equal in Hobbit society, this is not portrayed in the movie.

The book also mentions Frodo, Merry, and Pippin being old friends, while Sam is not mentioned in that way until much later.

Quotes from the book:


  As the years passed, Frodo seemed to stop aging and appeared at age 50 like a robust Hobbit just out of his tweens. Frodo was red-cheeked and rather stout, but taller and fairer than most Hobbits, with brown hair, bright eyes, and a cleft in his chin.
  
  Sam had learned to read and write from Bilbo Baggins and he listened eagerly to Bilbo's tales about his adventures, particularly the ones about Elves.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why Do Jedi Use One Lightsaber in Combat?
qn_description:
While I've seen Ahsoko Tano, in The Clone Wars, fight with two lightsabers (one in each hand), this seems to be extremely rare for Jedi.  We've seen Sith do this frequently, like Asajj Ventress, with two lightsabers.  Darth Maul used a dual lightsaber against Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi and then there's General Grievous, who uses multiple lightsabers with his multiple limbs.

But most Jedi use just one blade, and their lightsaber hilts tend to be simple, just a straight cylinder without much adornment, while Sith sometimes use curved grips or other more exotic stylings.

Is there a reason Jedi stick with the simplest lightsaber designs and why the vast majority (at least in the movies and in The Clone Wars series) use only a single lightsaber?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
The limiting factor is not open hands - it's the agility of the mind to move them, and the efficacy of the training involved. I did some fencing back in college, which is light-years, if you'll pardon the expression, from a lightsaber battle, but does share some things in common, and I've studied a number of martial arts. 

What you're contending against in a confrontation is not the attacker's hand, foot or sword, but their coordinated will. "Coordinated" is the key word there - if the hand and feet are not moving together, you can't attack effectively. So putting another sword in someone's hand doesn't make them twice as effective, any more than trying to kick and punch someone at the same time does...it's more likely to make you fall over, or at least be off balance and open to attack.

Consider the difference in footwork between kendo and fencing. In fencing, the body is high, light and fast, moving rapidly (potentially) up and down. In kendo, the movement is more lateral, with the center of gravity lower to the ground. Kendo movement is crossovers with feet, fencing is more like natural stepping. Why?

Kendo (generally) adopts a two-handed grip, while fencing has a one-handed grip - the other hand is available for balance:



Having said all of this - the key to using multiple weapons in this context would be kata, a coordinated and heavily pre-practiced set of movements which allow the performer to coordinate those motions in a way which has been determined in advance to be effective. But there's nothing to say that these kata will, per se, be more effective than single weapon kata.

It's all about the coordinated will and training of your opponent. Whether they have one weapon or two is not the question - if I started out with a weapon in each hand, I would literally toss it away (out of the reach of my opponent). I don't need the additional brainspace of managing it, and I want my hand open for balance.

While some kendo practitioners do use two swords (nito) in matches, it is rather rare because of the difficulty to focus on two points effectively:



UPDATE:

One more point - Count Dooku defeats a dual-wielding Anakin in short order. Obi-wan defeats a MULTIPLE-wielding General Grievous in short order. I think the real question is - why do the Sith tend to dual-wield when it doesn't seem to confer any significant advantage?
AnswerKenntnis:
In-universe: 

Keep in mind that the Jedi Knights are primarily police. Even the Jedi who devote themselves to the martial school, like Mace Windu, do not generally train in lightsaber combat as rigorously as a Sith does. This is because the overwhelming number of factions that would oppose the Jedi and the Republic are not Force-sensitive and do not wield lightsabers. The Jedi thus train - and fight - against mostly blaster-wielders, and in those cases a single lightsaber to deflect bolts is usually more than adequate, and the focus is on mastering control of a single blade.

The Jedi are also a little more regimented in their training; from Youngling to Padawan to full Knight, most Jedi initiates get the same basic training as any other, and when they progress to Padawan they are counseled by a Jedi who probably grew up in the same system. Only after a Jedi reaches the rank of Master are they learning for themselves and not being taught by another Jedi, and by then their lightsaber training is well-ingrained into the one of the seven single-saber schools.

Now, the Sith came into being as a force opposing the Jedi; they were originally exiles from the Jedi Order, and created the Sith Order with the specific goal of taking their revenge on the Jedi. As a result of both that, and the nature of the Sith themselves to fight each other for dominance, Sith expect other Force-sensitives as opponents. So, they train very rigorously in lightsaber combat, especially saber-vs-saber styles like the very antiquated Form II, and adopt novel styles of combat (such as lightwhips, ergonomic "fencing" sabers like Dooku's, staff-styles like Maul's, and yes, double-saber styles) that are unfamiliar to even experienced Jedi. As a result, Sith more often than not mop the floor with the average Jedi Knight.

Also remember that the Dark Side can make one very powerful, very quickly. It can take decades to become a Jedi Master. Count Dooku was already a very experienced Jedi Knight before falling to the Dark Side, and as such it took one of the most experienced Jedi - Yoda - to stand a chance against him, and even then the fight was a stalemate. It took an even more powerful (and emotionally unhinged) Jedi - Anakin - to finally defeat him, and it's also thought that Palpatine told Dooku to hold back against Anakin.

Case in point: when Obi-Wan tossed Anakin a second lightsaber in Ep. II, Anakin was able to draw on the Force to be effective in dual-saber style, but he was obviously inexperienced in that style; according to EU sources, Anakin practiced Form V, which is very strength-dependent, and is more suited to two hands on one saber for leverage. His unfamiliarity with  dual sabers, and with Form III or IV which would have been better suited to using two sabers, resulted in a mistake that lost him one of the sabers. So, he reverted to his natural single-saber Form V style, which lasted longer as he was more comfortable and experienced in that style. He still lost to Dooku, who first had a few decades' experience as a Jedi over both Obi-Wan and Anakin, and second had trained even more purposefully under Palpatine to fight Jedi using Form II, which is antiquated but highly effective against a lightsaber-wielding opponent.

Out-of-universe:

We never saw anyone use more than one lightsaber in the original trilogy. Of course, the only three lightsaber-users in that trilogy were Obi-Wan, Luke and Vader, so it's a relatively small pool, but the initial stage direction Lucas gave all the lightsaber-wielders was a very heavy Kendo style, as if the lightsaber blade were as heavy as a nodachi or broadsword. The development of alternate weapons and fighting styles was originally developed in the EU through fan involvement, including the background behind the physics of a lightsaber like the fact that the blade is near-weightless but subject to other forces. Elements of the EU then bled back into G-canon in the prequel trilogy as Lucas and the scriptwriters looked for ways to kick the fighting up a notch from the original trilogy. The  first change was to the pace of fighting; the choreography drastically increased in tempo. The second was the inclusion of alternate fighting styles and variations of weapons. We never did see a lightwhip, but dual-saber and staff styles made it from the comics and novels to the movies.
AnswerKenntnis:
Among other reasons, Jedi are not warriors! They are trained for combat, but combat is not what they intend. OTOH, Sith are. The same way a SpecOps teams' will be severely more advanced, different, and fancy compared to a random non-SWAT cop (especially a Bobby).

Also, anything beyond a single regular lightsaber for a Sith also seems to be a rarity, though I didn't research this extensively. Your question only lists 1 dual-bladed LS and one 2-lightsaber Sith (Grievous doesn't count, not being Force sensitive).
AnswerKenntnis:
First, there is more then one lightsaber fighting style.

One thing to keep in mind is the the Jedi are "space samurai", they are disciplined warriors that fight primarily defensibly. Their training is exceptionally conservative because the Jedi order fear their own falling to the ever persuasive dark side (fear of one falling to the dark side is an almost paranoia level fear by master Yoda and others). 

The most defensive fighting style with a lightsaber is two hands on one sword, much like a samurai katana. Over time Lucas had them take more aggressive postures, but never something as brash as two lightsabers. That would be foolish and reckless in a Jedi's eyes.

Jedi favor delicate control over raw power, contrast this to Sith techniques. Sith are not as disciplined in their fighting style, utilizing multiple lightsabers, different kinds of lightsabers, and experimenting with synthetic crystals. They are more likely to break the rules in pursuit of their ambitions.
AnswerKenntnis:
One theme that runs through the Jedi code is to resist the desire for power. Wielding two blades or a double blade was widely seen as too powerful for a Jedi to contain, much like the Vaapad fighting stance. The only Jedi to use Vaapad was Mace Windu, and his ability to focus the dark side of the force to do so was extremely uncommon.

On the other hand, Sith are encouraged to feed their passion and lust for power. Wielding multiple blades or an exotic blade is far more in line with grabbing power.

Additionally, the Sith focused on aggression and offense. The Jedi method was defense and mitigation. A multi wielder has no ability to defend well, but they can certainly attack rapidly and aggressively.
AnswerKenntnis:
A simple answer may well be that they seem to be loosely based around samurai, who's primary sword style used the katana (a weapon intended to be wielded with both hands).

From a practical standpoint, I'm a student of Modern Arnis which is a weapon style revolving around the use of two sticks (or blades, such as machetes). I can tell you from much training that effectively using two weapons in combat is very difficult. The simple act of striking and defending without causing the weapons to entangle takes months of training (much less doing so in a stressful environment, and with adrenaline pumping through you). If you were working with a weapon that didn't have a single safe edge you probably wouldn't want to take the risk.

Another possibility, from my Kendo training: many people don't realize that when one person strikes another's weapon with any amount of force, it takes effort to prevent that weapon from rebounding back at you. Going back to the "no safe edge"  argument, it could be that a Jedi wouldn't want his balance and attention compromised so that he could focus more heavily on keeping the weapon safely focused on the enemy.

Finally, from a realistic standpoint: did you realize that for the original movies, the lightsaber effect was generated by going back manually by hand and drawing the effect onto each individual frame? That's a ton of work. Two lightsabers means double the time invested! Modern technology makes this much simpler.
AnswerKenntnis:
Given that lightsabers are very light and that they function as much as a shield as a sword, it would make sense to wield one in each hand.

However, when encountering another lightsaber, strength comes into play.  As such, a two handed grip on a single lightsaber would provide more strength and more leverage, preventing your opponent from simply pushing your lightsaber back into your body.

With regards to Darth Maul, I'm fairly certain his lightsaber would be more of a hindrance than a help in any combat, due to the fact that a good number of the possible ways he could hold his lightsaber would result in one end encountering his own body.  It worked as a decent defensive weapon, which is likely why he waited until he was attacked by two Jedi before activating the second part of the blade.
AnswerKenntnis:
It's Not as clumsy or random as a blaster. It's an elegant weapon for a more civilized age.
AnswerKenntnis:
I have a other answer coming from the books "Darth Bane: Path of Destruction"

When Bane was training under Kas'im, Kas'im told Bane that a double bladed lightsaber (or in extend 2 lightsabers) give no advantages at all, except when the opponent is intrigued by the weapons.

"So the double-bladed weapon gives you more options?"
"No, but you think it does, so the effect is the same."
ΓÇòKas'im explains to Bane the advantage of the double-bladed lightsaber [src]

It's all about trying to get that little advantage over the other in battle.
AnswerKenntnis:
From Wookieepdia http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Niman/Jar'Kai: 


  "Firstly, as both hands held individual lightsabers, two-handed blows
  were impossible, and the duelist was unable to put all his or her
  weight behind blocks, weakening the defensive capabilities. Thusly, an
  enemy with a single hilt could simply assault a Jar'Kai practitioners
  defense with brute force, battering away until the dual-blade
  duelist's guard gave way, as shown during Anakin Skywalker's duel with
  Asajj Ventress on Yavin 4. However, this weakness was hardly absolute,
  as some duelists possessed the physical strength to block power
  attacks with only one arm, examples including Grievous, whose
  mechanically augmented strength allowed him to both effectively defend
  against and dole out heavy power blows.[29] Asajj Ventress eventually
  developed the physical strength necessary to compensate for this
  weakness, being able to hold up simultaneous bladelocks with both
  Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka Tano, both of whom were Form V
  practitioners."
AnswerKenntnis:
Here is several unrelated examples of dual-wielding or double-bladed lightsabers in the EU. 


Luke Skywalker and Mara Jade Skywalker used a shoto lightsaber to battle Lumiya in the Legacy of the Force series. 
Bastila Shan, a character from KOTOR, uses a double-bladed lightsaber in KOTOR.
The character that you play as in KOTOR can dual-wield lightsabers later on in the game.
Luke Skywalker used Jacen Solo's lightsaber in the New Jedi Order series to rescue Jacen early on in the war with the Yuuzhan Vong on the planet Belkadan.


These are only a few examples, but they all seem to be exceptional Jedi. Luke and Mara were Jedi Masters, Bastila was called a exceptional Jedi in the story, and the main character was a former Sith Lord and one of the best Jedi at the academy.

To answer the question about special lightsaber handles. Tenal Ka from the EU has a curved rancor tooth lightsaber as evidenced in the Young Jedi Knights series where she builds it.
AnswerKenntnis:
Lightsabers are nearly impossible to wield efficiently without the aid of the Force because the only weight on the weapon is in the hilt.  The plasma blade weighs nothing, so the weapon is terribly balanced and highly unpredictable.  Stabilizing and keeping tabs on more than one at a time takes an even larger amount of effort and training.  It's really much more practical for your average Jedi to use one.
QuestionKenntnis:
What episodes of Doctor Who should I watch first?
qn_description:
My question is related to the one about what older episodes to watch, but comes from a total beginner's point of view. I've heard wonders about Doctor Who and I've become interested in watching it. But there are lots of seasons with different Doctors, and I don't know where to start.

Where would you recommend starting and what are the definitive episodes/seasons I should watch?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
As a TOTAL beginner, I'd suggest you start with the 2005 reboot, and watch them in the order they aired. It's both easier to get a hold of, and more modern. Plus once you're caught up, you can easily watch the new episodes as they're released.

In addition, if you're enjoying the modern Doctor Who series, I'd recommend watching Torchwood as well; preferably in the sequence it aired, as there are tie-ins with Doctor Who.

However, if you subsequently wish to watch some of the more "landmark" classic episodes, I'd suggest you go for 2nd, 3rd or 4th doctor stories first; specifically those involving the Daleks or the Cybermen. The 4th Doctor's Genesis of the Daleks is a fantastic story, and introduced a recurring villain (who appears in the modern series), and the 3rd Doctor's Master storyline introduced the character (who also appears in the modern series), so is well worth checking out. On top of this some of the 2nd Doctor's stories are well worth watching; specifically the early Cybermen stories like Tomb of the Cybermen, and the 2nd Doctor's final story, War Games.

I'd agree with other commenters, though, that the modern reboot is a lot easier to get into than the classic series, as the classic series is a bit dated in places, and the low budget special effects are often a bit corny. However, if you can deal with that, and enjoy the modern series, then I'd highly recommend checking out some of the classic series as well.
AnswerKenntnis:
I started with the 2005 reboot with Christopher Eccleston as the Doctor.  While it has a number of little references back to earlier series, I didn't find it particularly difficult to keep up.  I'm in mid-season 3 now (and part of Torchwood) and greatly enjoying it, so I think that's a fine place to start.  Particularly since they're very easy to access.  (I'm watching them on Netflix instant queue.)  

That's all I could say about it so far, though watching the newer series has excited me to watch the older ones now, which I had very little interest in before, so I'd rate it well as a "gateway drug" for the older Who.
AnswerKenntnis:
The best way to start watching the Doctor is definitely the 2005 series.  The other 'obvious' place to start is the first episode of the first Doctor.  DO NOT do this, it has spoiled several people who could have otherwise been big fans.  Many of the earliest episodes are missing.

From Wikipedia:


  There are 27 incomplete Doctor Who
  serials, with 108 of 253 episodes from
  the first six years of the programme
  missing. Many more were thought to be
  lost until copies were recovered from
  various sources, mostly overseas
  broadcasters.
  
  Doctor Who is not unique in this
  respect, as thousands of hours of
  programming from across all genres
  were destroyed by the BBC until 1978,
  when the corporation's archiving
  policies were changed.


Essentially, due to the British laws around copyright and broadcast rights, TV shows couldn't be rerun after a certain amount of time.  At that point, the shows became useless to the BBC, which preferred to wipe and re-use the (moderately expensive at the time) tapes.

This policy was only changed with the advent of VHS technology.  The only reason we have any of the old Doctor Who episodes is a hodgepodge of BBC misfiling, overseas broadcasts, fan 'taping' of various forms (mostly audio or using video cameras, typically poor quality).

More than one person who has been willing to put up with the cheesy dialog and poor acting/effects has had the fact that several episodes are missing (except for often poor-quality audio) as the straw that broke the camel's back.

Therefore, if you want to start with the older material, I'd suggest starting with the Third Doctor.  The 2nd Doctor was the last one to be filmed in black and white, and the last missing episode is in his second-to-last serial.
AnswerKenntnis:
As others have mentioned, the 2005 relaunch is a good starting point.  However, season 5 which is the first season with Matt Smith as the Doctor is also a good starting point.  The Doctor just got a new regeneration, so it's a new face, and a new companion.  They wrote it such that this season is a good jump on point for new people, with less continuity going back to the last few seasons.
AnswerKenntnis:
My "in-Doctor-ination" kit includes the following episodes:


Blink
Vincent and the Doctor
The Girl in the Fireplace
Midnight (optionally: The Empty Child)


You hit both ends of the scary/sweet spectrum right up front, you see some of the gorgeous design of Girl in the Fireplace (along with a sense of the Doctor's character--the boyishness and the loneliness), and then jam right back to suspenseful/scary with Midnight or The Empty Child.

Each series of the reboot does have an arc to it, but these episodes stand alone quite nicely. I've turned quite a few people into dedicated Whovians with these four/five episodes.
AnswerKenntnis:
If you want to know if you will like it, watch the 10th Doctor episode "Blink". It is almost completely detached from the rest of the series, so you don't have to know anything at all. It's the perfect 'first episode' to watch.

Then, if you like it, start watching from the 2005 reboot.
AnswerKenntnis:
I always give the same advice to people that are just starting with Doctor Who: watch the 'new' series first; if you love them (and you will), they'll warm you up for the beauty of the 'old' ones.
AnswerKenntnis:
The 2005 reboot is a great place to start - if you want to watch all of them. However, it would be alright to start with the 11th Doctor: new face, new personality, new screwdriver. Any references you do not understand can be simply searched for or read in a plot breakdown.
AnswerKenntnis:
Like mentioned above, I would start with the beginning of the 2005 version of the show.  Alternately, the beginning of the 5th series is a good place to start.  After that, you may want to check out some of the classic series.  While the effects are pretty primitive, some of the acting is actually quite good.  Quality varied pretty wildly during the run of the show.

I had a lot of luck googling "best Dr Who episodes" and just started there.  I especially liked Caves of Androzani, Horror of Fang Rock, The Three Doctors, The Mind Robber, and Carnival of Monsters.  If you have Netflix, these are all available through instant streaming.

Most of these stories are pretty self contained, even the ones with a larger arc, like the key of time run.  There is no need to find them in any particular order.
AnswerKenntnis:
Actually, I belive that starting with the 4th Doctor would be a good start.  It worked for me, and for my grown children.
QuestionKenntnis:
Where did Harry's parents get all of their money from?
qn_description:
So, at the beginning of Harry Potter, Harry is found to have a large vault of gold at Gringots. Where did all of that money come from? What did James (I assume it came from him, Lily was muggle-born, and they both were young) do to get all of that cash?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Harry's money came from inheritance from his father, James. 

James was independently wealthy (from family money) when he left Hogwarts, sufficiently such that he was able to support himself, Sirius, and Lily as full-time (unpaid) fighters for the Order of the Phoenix.  Beyond that, there is no information as to where James's wealth came from or what his parents (Harry's paternal grandparents) did for a living or how they made their money.

Source : JKR Interview  by a 14-year-old boy named Owen Jones who won the chance in 2005 to interview her.


  Q: Where does he [Harry] get his money?  He always seems to have some.  Does he have a bank account?  Where is it? Where's his money?
  
  JKR: Well, as you know, Harry's bank account is in Gringotts. His money came from inheritance, from his father. But I think, on a deeper level...  [On the one hand,] Harry's money never really is that important in the books, except that he can afford his uniform and so on.  [On the other hand,] I think I really gave him a fortune because I was so broke when I wrote the first book and it was wishful thinking that I would not have to worry about such things.
AnswerKenntnis:
From an earlier interview by J.K.Rowling:


  Q: What did James and Lily Potter do when they were alive?
  
  JKR: Well, I can't go into too much detail, because you're going to find out in future books. But James inherited plenty of money, so he didn't need a well-paid profession. You'll find out more about both Harry's parents later.


It is not very clear how much is left, because James needed to support Lupin as well:


  Jo related the fact that Remus Lupin, prior to the third book, was unemployable because he was a werewolf, and upon his graduation from Hogwarts, along with James and Lily, was supported by James using their own money. In addition to this, she shed more light on the early days of the Order, saying James, Sirius, Remus and Lily were full time Order members. "Full Time Fighters," as Jo put it.
   -  J. K. Rowling at Carnegie Hall, 2007
AnswerKenntnis:
It's never really explained where the money that's left to Harry comes from. His grandparents on both sides are apparently dead before the start of the first book, possibly at the hands of the Death Eaters.

It's said in the book and the movie by Hagrid, "you didn't really think your parents would leave you with nothin'?" Again, it's not clear what James and Lily did for a living, if they ever did have to work for a living (maybe James was indeed independently wealthy; he's cocky enough as a kid to be an heir), but if they did work, they'd probably have some sort of retirement fund they'd been socking away toward, which would pass to Harry as next of kin. 

Although the financial system of the Potterverse isn't covered in-depth, it would also be easy to imply that Gringott's pays interest on any gold they're allowed to make use of in loans; some vaults are like safe deposit boxes, while others are more like ordinary bank accounts. Gringotts is a business like anything else; I doubt the goblins love gold so much they'd work for free just to be around it. Behold the wonders of compound interest accrued over 10 years on a nest egg that is never touched.

Anyway, what was left to Harry is enough that Harry's time in school is financially comfortable, but it's by no means extravagant; he didn't buy his own Firebolt, for instance. It only looks like a lot compared to what the Weasleys live on; working in the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts office doesn't pay much, obviously, and the Weasleys have had six kids. The Malfoys, on the other hand, are the evil Rockefellers; so much money that Lucius thinks nothing of buying Draco's way onto the Slytherin Quidditch team.
AnswerKenntnis:
Harry is a descendant of the Peverells, an ancient and magically powerful family (and so, potentially rich, like the Malfoys). He inherited the invisibility cloak that belonged to Ignotus, so presumably any family fortune would also have been passed down from parent to child.
AnswerKenntnis:
It's also possible that some of the money came from rewards for capturing Death Eaters during the first war with Voldemort.
AnswerKenntnis:
It never really mentions how come Harry Potter has so much money, but James Potter inherited a lot of money from his parents and no doubt Sirius Black's relations are rich. I think they provided Harry Potter with enough money for "comfortable living" given Harry has no siblings or other members of family to share his parent's money with. JKR also mentions that the Dursleys, highly wealthy by themselves, would readily take all the money in his vault, in TPS:


  The Dursleys couldn't have known about this or they'd have had it from him faster than blinking.
AnswerKenntnis:
Xenophilius Lovegood says in book 7 that anyone who possesses the Invisibility Cloak (Third Deathly Hollow) would be unbelievably rich. As the cloak was handed down from Ignotus Peverell through his wizarding line over the years, the family accumulated money, which was handed down to James as an only child and then Harry as an only child.
AnswerKenntnis:
To someone's earlier answer about how he didn't buy his Firebolt, the only reason he didn't was that he didn't want to waste a big chunk of the money he would need to get through five more years at Hogwarts. 

The money he was left from his parents came from his dad's side of the family, for they were really wealthy. When Sirius died he left Harry all of his possessions, including his own great wealth from being the sole heir to the Black family fortune. 

Sirius bought Harry the Firebolt as a present to make up for the missing 13 birthdays. It also had a more significant meaning behind it because for Harry's 1st birthday Sirius had bought him a little toy broomstick for wizard kids to hover around on. 

But both the Potters and the Blacks were extremely wealthy purebloods and since James was an only child, he inherited it all. Since Sirius was the only living child at the time of his mother's death, he inherited it in turn. So when Harry finally inherited the money and possessions of both families he was considered extremely wealthy by wizard standards; probably close to, if not more than, the Malfoys.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why aren't alien planets as varied in climate as the Earth?
qn_description:
The Earth in all of its varieties has wide ranging climates. At the top level it has tropical, dry, temperate, continental, and polar climates. And yet often the planets depicted in science fiction are often single climate planets. 


The forest moon of Endor
The desert planet of Dune
The desert planet of Tatooine
The desert planet of Vulcan
The outer planets in Firefly all appeared to be mostly desert (supiciously like Calfornia desert). 
The inner planets in Firefly were all temperate or tropical. 
The icy Breen homeworld
The icy Andorian homeworld
The icy Frost Giant planet


I'm not suggesting there are no Earth-like planets in science fiction, but it feels like it is less common than it should be. Considering the only planet we have as an example is our own, it seems like planets should be just as varied in the cosmos.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
This is known on tvtropes as the Single Biome Planet trope:


  Planets in outer space will often be defined by a single setting. It
  doesn't matter if the events of the story only take place in on a
  small portion of the planet ΓÇö we are still told the entire planet has
  one climate; specifically, the same climate as where the story takes
  place. Very rarely does any planet have the same level of
  environmental diversity as Earth, despite being as large and having a
  normal orbit. An ecological equivalent to the Planet of
  Hats.


See the link for a more complete description and a pretty long list of examples. It also discusses when single biome planets can be justified.

Personally I am often annoyed by the frequent occurrence of this trope in mainstream SF and Fantasy (although the latter also often succumbs to the opposite, Patchwork maps). It can make an entire world flat, uninspiring and implausible, and I would advise any aspiring SF writer to avoid this at all cost.
AnswerKenntnis:
Since humans evolved on the Earth, we're sensitive to its climatic variations. -10C is arctic, +30C is tropical. Alien planets are unlikely to be centred around the temperature ranges that humans find comfortable. If a planet has as much variation as the Earth but in the range -60C to -20C, it's all arctic. If it's +30C to +70C, it's all hot (and much of it is probably uninhabitable).
AnswerKenntnis:
There are several reasons science fiction worlds do not suffer the climactic variability of Earth. Increased simplification of writing or display in media, lack of scientific knowledge of writers regarding weather and climate, and unless weather is an active participant in the story, it is more a window dressing or stage setting than something to be focused on as an element in a story.


Easier to write about if the entire planet is one giant ecosystem of one type or another. Readers or watchers say, "oh an ice planet" and are able to move on to the next part of the story. This trope is far more common than you realize. Watch any modern science fiction and you will see this trope in action.
Writers are often limited in their understanding of the causes of weather, the development of climate, or environmental conditions contributing to weather. So, when in doubt, they make the entire world that way and move on.
A planet without an axial tilt, and with a circular orbit (rather than elliptical), will tend to have fairly uniform weather bands across the same latitude of a planet because there is an even heating and cooling of the world. Our world's weather varies strongly because of the Earth 23.4 degree tilt on its axis. This tilt creates variability in our weather and in conjunction with our variation in distance from the sun can cause a wide variation in our weather patterns. 





The Earth's axial tilt is theorized to be a result of a Mars-sized body striking the Earth 4 billion years ago. This body may have knocked the Earth off of its normal zero degree tilt and altered weather patterns across the Earth since then. 



  So, seasonal changes depend on the tilt of the earth's axis because they lead to changes in the amount of heat delivered to a square meter of surface, and the fact that there are a changing number of hours in the day when the Sun is above the horizon and high enough up that it can efficiently heat the surface over the course of a typical day. --Goddard's Space Flight Center > Ask an astrophysicist
AnswerKenntnis:
I imagine this could be the result of a prevailing sense that our little blue planet (and in particular the climatological state that it's in now) is very much unique and unusual in its features. Consider the following points:


The other eight seven planets of our star system are fairly uniform: a hot, desolate marble (Mercury), an inhospitable greenhouse (Venus), a cool desert (Mars), and a bunch of gas giants. Even if you consider some of the larger moons, like Europa or Io, you still see some fairly uniform climatic features.
The geological history of Earth suggests that we have gone through "Greenhouse" and "Snowball" periods where the climate would have been quite a bit more uniform. The variety in climate we see now could therefore be considered uncharacteristic or short-lived.
AnswerKenntnis:
Theme

The main reasoning is that the minds behind the stories being told have an idea or a concept they want to get across, which is an easier concept to send to the viewer/reader if the entire planet only features one biome.

On Hoth for example they want to show how far out the rebels have been pushed, to what extremes, literal and figurative, they have been forced. As such it necessitates the entire planet being shown as an ice planet so no one has to explain why the rebels chose that ice-desert over a tropical region.

On endor the idea may have been to show a less advanced group (rebels) over throw the more advanced enemies. To facilitate this, they force the juxtaposition of shield generators and AT-ST in the jungle. And work with common understandings of jungle dwelling civilisations being less advanced to show off the accomplishment is down to perseverance, not superior tech.
AnswerKenntnis:
H.P. Lovecraft wrote about this topic in an article in 1934, and criticized exactly these points in the 1930's: "Some Notes on Interplanetary Fiction (written around July 1934; Winter 1935)". And then there is the wonderful Supernatural Horror in Literature, which was aiming more generally at what makes fantasy/sci-fi literature and film adaptations rather predictable. Oh, and it's a very interesting insight into the history of, what he calls "Supernatural Horror."

I have the text, but it's not in English... but he points at exactly the things that make 90% of sci-fi so very generic. Stanislaw Lem and the brothers Strugatzki went very different ways in that area. Hope this helped a little bit. Cheers!
AnswerKenntnis:
The issue is that we're talking about science fiction here. Note that while the genre in theory is not so young (just to give one example, Icarus could be considered science fiction, as it featured technology that made something possible that actually wasn't in that time). The concept of actually visiting different planets is (200 years is young in this context).

Also, stories are essentially memes. I would argue there isn't a single truly 100% original story. Everything is ultimately tailored together (while still allowing for creativity and innovation) from ideas that the writer(s) picked up from other writers. Like the evolution of genes, the evolution of memes takes time (while it is faster by orders of magnitude).

If you can't go to other planets you're stuck on earth. A scenery of a location is a functional element of a story if it's of any importance. For instance, if you tell the story of Columbus, an important element of that story might be the rough sea. That's a fixed location, as a plot element. Similarly there are stories that involve traversing a desert. Again, you're immobile because the roots of the memes that we keep evolving lie in a time, where you couldn't change location that fast.

Now, if you write a story that involves planets, they're locations, and since the story is inspired by previous memes it makes sense that that location has fixed properties, such as being extremely cold.

So of course you can introduce a planet with realistic heterogeneous climates, but in order for it to be actually part of the story, you have to come up with a story that genuinely involves these features, and you have little inspiration to work with.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think that Mike Scott is partly correct.

However, there is another crucial aspect - useful land masses. Humans prefer to settle on land in places that have convenient resources (water, minerals, arable land). So, if a planet has only one continent, and that with an average temperature of -10C then it may not matter what the rest of the planet's climate is - people are probably going to think of it as an ice planet.

In truth, we don't really know that much about planet formation and this gives writers tremendous latitude when world building. As long as the planets they create are within reason, given the climate factors that we do understand, nobody can really say that they're wrong.
AnswerKenntnis:
Most science fiction and fantasy is inevitably linked to existing story-telling tropes.

So what would, in a traditional setting, be an (environmentally homogenous) city or country becomes a planet, a continent becomes a star system, the world becomes a galaxy and different races or cultures are translated into different sentient species.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think most books or movies only show a small part of the planets. Who knows what the rest was like?
AnswerKenntnis:
For the same reason that characters, events, places, and everything else in fiction are not as varied as in reality ... because the author is telling a specific story.
QuestionKenntnis:
What's the recommend reading order of the Ender Wiggin books?
qn_description:
The series that start's with Ender's Game has a parallel series that starts with Ender's Shadow.  The graph of the timeline is... well... complicated.



Does it make more sense if you read them in the order they were first published, or if you try to read them in the chronological order of the story?

Image Reference: Ender's Game (series)
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
As someone who has read every book I think the publishing order is the best order to read them in because it is the order the author added to the universe. They each build on everything published before them and if you read them in a different order you don't get the same build-up and sense of discovery you would get by having things you may have wondered about in earlier books be revealed in later ones.
AnswerKenntnis:
The "official" answer from Orson Scott Card is:


  in truth it doesn't matter, except that you should read Xenocide right before Children of the Mind, since they are really two halves of a single continuous story. In most of my books, I include all the information you need.
AnswerKenntnis:
The Ender series contains three major arcs. These are, in publishing order:
 Ender series, the Shadow series, and The War of Gifts.

Normally, one would read in the publishing order, but you could read these arcs in any order.  Ender's Game, Ender's Shadow, and The War of Gifts are parallel novels that take place at the same point in time, from different perspectives. Their arcs then diverge from that point, from those unique perspectives. In fact, you could certainly read in a more-or-less chronological fashion:

Ender's Game, The War of Gifts, Shadow series, Ender series.

The advantage of reading in a chronological order is that the direct sequels of Ender's game take place thousands of years in the future and are quite distant from Ender's game in terms of plot. When reading chronologically, the story evolves in a more fluid an direct way.

The books under each arc are as follows...

Shadow Series:


Ender's Shadow
Shadow of the Hegemon
Shadow Puppets
Shadow of the Giant
Shadows in Flight


Ender Series:


Ender's Game 
Ender in Exile (only
chronologically, this is the most
recently published book)
Speaker for the Dead
Xenocide 
Children of the Mind


War of Gifts:


A War of Gifts: An Ender Story
AnswerKenntnis:
First, read "Ender's Game" - it's the core book and establishes the setting.

Then I'd read "Ender's Shadow", which covers the same period of time from alternate points of view. (And indirectly explains

After that, it really depends on which plot you want to follow. There are two trilogies, and they go in very different directions.

The Speaker trilogy (Speaker for the Dead, Xenocide, Children of the Mind):


  follows Ender after he leaves Earth, and takes place in the far future. It tends to focus on "meaning of life and universe" topics.


The Shadow books:


  stay in the "present" on Earth, following Bean, Peter, Valentine, and the other supporting characters, and explores the aftermath of "what happens when a bunch of teenagers save the world". These books are a bit more political and realistic.


The short stories tend to be snapshots in time, and aren't really necessary until you've become well and truly hooked.


   For instance, "Investment Counselor" introduces you to Ender's AI, but it works perfectly well as a flashback instead of reading that in it's chronological order. War of Gifts is similar, in that it fills in history without advancing the plot.
AnswerKenntnis:
I would recommend either reading them in the publish order, or reading the Ender's series books first followed by the Shadow series. It doesn't hurt to occasionally switch books to be chronological either, but in general...
AnswerKenntnis:
I love the Enders Game series and in reference to the novels, every time I suggest reading them, I tell people to stick to the timeline.  Card admitted that when he wrote the original sequels, he was still young and inexperienced.  If you read "Enders Game", then the "shadow" books through "Shadow of the Giant", then "Ender in Exile", then "Speaker for the Dead" and so forth, it makes for the best read in my opinion.  Specifically because there are familiar characters in Ender in Exile that you would recognize only after reading the shadow books and technically "Ender in Exile" happens before the end of the original "Enders Game" book.
AnswerKenntnis:
Read them in published order, as stated earlier you will most likely miss out on the wonder of the series by reading them for the first time chronologically. If your hooked enough to finish them once then go back and read them chronologically! I'm on my THIRD read through and am reading them in publishing order again because I found that the story just feels better that way. Card's writing evolves in a subtle but still noticeable way as time goes on and if you truly enjoy the series it is definitely better to "feel" the evolution as the story progresses.
QuestionKenntnis:
Weren't there originally going to be nine Star Wars films?
qn_description:
I seem to remember reading that there were going to be three trilogies originally in Star Wars, i.e. they would add episodes 7 - 9.

Was that ever the case? What happened to that plan?

Update: looks like that original plan might be back after all!
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
`Many contradicting claims have been made on that subject :


  George Lucas's conception of Star Wars was of a single episode in an unmade serial
  
  
  Wikipedia, Star Wars sequel trilogy article
  


But also:


  In a 2004 interview, Hamill said: "You know, when I first did this, it was four trilogies. 12 movies! And out on the desert, any time between setups...lots of free time. And George was talking about this whole thing. I said, 'Why are you starting with IV, V and VI? It's crazy.' [Imitating Lucas grumble,] 'It's the most commercial section of the movie.' 
  
  starwars.wikia Sequel trilogy article


There is also some rumor that Thrawn Trilogy by Timothy Zahn was an order by George Lucas for the movies 7-8-9, but the same rumor as circulated about Dark Empire.
AnswerKenntnis:
I've done a bunch of research on this topic, and there just aren't many reliable sources on the matter... As with many questions on this site, there's a Wikipedia entry that lists the best sources. Bottom line is this:


Star Wars was originally only going to be a single episode.
The movie was so popular, that a total of 11 sequels were sketched out (according to Time Magazine from March 1978).
The number of planned episodes varied, but the final number of 9 came from a Time Magazine article in May 1983. The prequels were fairly well defined there, the sequels, well, not at all really. 
There are some fairly current rumors that sequels might be planned, but nothing for sure, so...


Hope this sets the record straight.

EDIT: Oct 30, 2012

Disney bought Lucas Films, which owns Star Wars. Bottom line is, they are going to produce at least another trilogy, and quite possibly a lot more movies than that. See this news article.
AnswerKenntnis:
The one thing about George Lucas that everyone need to understand is that since he began working on what became STAR WARS in 1973, he changed its so-called "history" countless times.

I will try to do this as spoiler free and short as possible...

After AMERICAN GRAFFITI, George Lucas wanted to make a serial sci-fi film that he grew up loving as a kid. Lucas and Francis Ford Coppola tried to get the rights to FLASH GORDON but the owner wouldn't sell it to a bunch of "unknowns".

Lucas decided to write it on his own. First was a two pages outline known as the JOURNAL OF THE WHILLS, in which he mentions the Jedi Windu and slowly starts to created somekind of backstory to this new universe.

But from there nothingΓÇª Lucas couldn't come up with a story. He remembered a film he saw while studying film making, THE HIDDEN FORTRESS by the great Akira Kurosawa. Lucas took the story, characters and most of the locations and only changed some of it. When he presented the first draft to Francis Ford Coppola, his friend and partner was shocked. "This is THE HIDDEN FORTRESS!" said Coppola. Francis suggested that they get the rights to remake it but they couldn't.

From there Lucas simply reworked some of the elements but the basic story and final film remained an "updated" version THE HIDDEN FORTRESS.

It is only while in principal photography that Lucas decided to change the title from THE ADVENTURES OF LUKE SKYWALKER to STAR WARS. There was no "EPISODE IV". There was no "A NEW HOPE". The original plan was for only one film but Fox asked for Lucas to plan for a sequel might be a possibility if the film made some money. With that in mind, both Mark Hamill and Carrie Fischer were signed for a sequel. George Lucas asked Alan Dean Forster to write a sequel that could be made for cheap, with the only returning characters to be Luke, Leia and Darth Vader (who could be recast since its a person in a suit). That "sequel" became the 1978 novel SPLINTER OF THE MIND'S EYE.

As you all know STAR WARS was huge! A phenomenal success. Its then that George Lucas though of the idea that every year he could make a new STAR WARS film but with someone new as the director. There would be a total of 12 films, just like the serials loved as a kid.

Work on the sequel started for Lucas. One thing he noticed was that the Darth Vader character was among the most popular of the characters from the film. In fact, he was the most popular right after R2-D2 and C3-PO in terms of merchandise sales.

With the struggle to come up with a solution to introduce the Skywalker father, who at this point in Lucas mind is someone completely different then Darth Vader, Lucas had to make a choice. In STAR WARS, Darth Vader is simply an henchman for the Empire. He is Grand Morf Tarkin's right hand man. He is the one that goes to war to get the job done. Vader invades the Rebel's ship at the beginning and even participates in the spaceships fight at the end to protect the Death Star.

But with the growing popularity of Vader, Lucas decided to turn things around. By the second draft of what would become THE EMPIRE STRIKE BACK, Darth Vader had become father Skywalker. It leads to one of the greatest twist in cinema history.

The sequel took so long to prepare then what was originally planned was changed. Lucas decided that there won't be 12 films in total but now "only" 9. With the theatrical re-release of STAR WARS, the title was changed to STAR WARS EPISODE IV A NEW HOPE. Back then theatrical re-release was a common thing.

With everything taking so long to make the first film, Lucas decided not to direct the sequel. While he refused at first, Irvin Kershner took in the directing chair for the sequel. Kershner had been a teacher and somewhat of a mentor to Lucas.

When THE EMPIRE STRIKE BACK was released it had the EPISODE V in its title. The film didn't performed as well as the first one. Lucas blaming pretty much everyone but himself for it.

With the next sequel, Lucas decided not direct it but to control everything. RETURN OF THE JEDI was more or less a rework of the original film but with a bigger budget and fx. The cantina is now Jabba's palace. The spaceship fight is bigger. And the original ending of STAR WARS where the Wookies were to fight the Empire was reworked with the Ewoks.

Lucas personal life was going down the toilet and this whole STAR WARS thing had taken the best and worst of him. After the release of RETURN OF THE JEDI, it was announced that the others 6 films; 3 prequels and 3 sequels will never get made.

The Thrawn Trilogy by Timothy Zahn renew interest in the STAR WARS series in the 1990s. STAR WARS was cool again. Lucas decided to return to the series and work on the prequels.

I have been a STAR WARS fan since the very beginning. My sources are various articles, interviews and videos. More importantly, any self respected STAR WARS fan should read the amazing book, THE SECRET HISTORY OF STAR WARS.
AnswerKenntnis:
Depending on his plans at the time and when you asked him, George Lucas has variously said there would be one film, three films, six films, nine films or 12 films.

A trilogy of trilogies

It was widely reported in 1980 that there would be nine films: a trilogy of trilogies.

Al Walentis wrote in the May 25, 1980 Reading Eagle:


  Lucas originally envisioned "Star Wars" as a single feature, but his 200-page screenplay proved too unwieldy. He then began tinkering with his story line, cutting it apart, sorting our all the various subplots. The script finally was pieced together as three distinct trilogies. 
  
  "There are essentially nine films," Lucas said. "The first trilogy is about the young Ben Kenobi and the early life of Luke Skywalker's father when Luke was a young boy. The first trilogy takes place some 20 years before the second. About a year elapses between each story of the first trilogy. The whole adventure - encompassing the three trilogies - spans about 40 years."


Irvin Kershner, director of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), was also on-script with the nine-film plan. Tom Buckley of the N.Y. Times wrote on May 25, 1980's The Spokesman-Review:


  "I told George I didn't want to do a sequel," Kershner said."He said, 'I don't blame you. Neither would I, but this isn't. It's the second act of the second trilogy of nine films I plan to make in this theme. I want it to be better than mine.' ..."


On the same page of the same paper, Richard Freeman of Newhouse News wrote:


  Three years ago, Hamill signed up for three "Star Wars" films, of which "The Empire Strikes Back" is the second. The third - still in the planning stage - will be called "The revenge of the Jedi," and Hamill worries that these titles will suggest the various Pink Panther sequels to audiences.
  
  If things work out, these three movies will eventually constitute only a third of the projected nine-movie "Star Wars" saga, but Hamill doesn't plan to be in any of the others.


On the following page of the same paper, Aljean Harmetz of the New York Times wrote:


  The "Star Wars" George Lucas has created in his mind will take nine movies to tell. "Star Wars" is actually "Star Wars, Episode IV: A New Hope," the first movie of the second trilogy. "The Empire Strikes Back" is "Star Wars, Episode V," while "The Return of the Jedi' is episode VI. The first trilogy deals with the young Darth Vader and the young Ben Kenobi. At the end of the first trilogy, Luke Skywalker is four years old. Only the robots - R2D2 and C-3PO - will be characters in all the movies.
  
  He chose to start in the middle because the first trilogy is, he says, "more plot-oriented, more soap-operaish." He adds that the "central core problem" of "Star Wars" hasn't even been stated yet. Although he originally saw Star Wars as six movies, his "dream" was only for "Star Wars" to do well enough so that he could finish the three movies in the second trilogy. "If people had laughed 'Star Wars' off the screen, I'd have been less surprised than I was at what did happen," he says. "Until the day it opened, I felt it would do $16 million and, if I pushed hard, I could make 'Empire.'"


An interview with Harrison Ford in Lakeland Ledger of July 4, 1980:


  Like Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker) and Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia), Ford has already signed up for the third "Star Wars" film, which is tentatively entitled "The Revenge of the Jedi." This will conclude the middle trilogy of the nine-part series, and Ford does not know whether it signals the end of Han Solo. It is up to George Lucas, the creator of the saga.
  
  "He has an idea of doing one (involving what happened to Solo) about 15 years from now, when I'll be 53. That's something I'd like to do."


The Phoenix of June 21, 1980 also mentions the three trilogies spanning 40 years, and:


  Thereafter, Lucas will go back to the first trilogy, starting with a story so far back that it does not include Darth Vader.
  
  If interest sustains, Star Wars could be in production well into the 1990s. David Prowse figures he'll get killed off (by Luke Skywalker?) in the seventh or eighth story.


At least one trilogy

And it seems at least one trilogy was planned from the start. One week after Star Wars came out, The Leader-Post of June 3, 1977 says:


  [Mark] Hamill said he believes Lucas plans a Star Wars trilogy because all the actors are under contract for two more films.


Reporting on the film's record-breaking success, an AP story in May 26, 1978's Schenectady Gazette says:


  Lucas had originally conceived of "Star Wars" as a trilogy. Work on the first sequel is well under way...


12 films

An article by Charles Champlin of the Los Angeles Times, printed in The Tuscaloosa News of June 15, 1979, quotes The Empire Strikes Back producer Gary Kurtz:


  Kurtz says that there are on paper the makings of a grand design of 12 films, including three stories that would historically precede the Skywalker takes (prequels, as they are dreadfully know these days).


A May 5, 1980 article quotes David Prowse as saying "They plan to do 12 movies."

13 movies

Finally, this 1979 promo advert for Kenner Star Wars claims:


  "That's right, Star Wars is forever. George Lucas and 20th Century Fox have plans for twelve more block-busting chapters to the Star Wars story.


So does that make 13?

15 and more

Lucas is selling Lucasfilm and the Star Wars rights to the Walt Disney Company who according to CNN (October 31, 2012) will make at least three sequel films, and then another film every two years (which might might not be sequels), and also possibly a television series:


  "It's now time for me to pass Star Wars on to a new generation of filmmakers," George Lucas said in a written statement. "I've always believed that Star Wars could live beyond me, and I thought it was important to set up the transition during my lifetime."
  
  Lucas said he will work as a creative consultant on Star Wars Episode 7, the first of a planned new trilogy of live-action Star Wars movies. It is targeted for release in 2015, Disney said.
  
  Disney hopes to essentially relaunch the Star Wars film franchise, which had its last installment in 2005 with Revenge of the Sith. Following the three planned sequels, the company envisions releasing even more Star Wars movies at a rate of a new film every two to three years.
  
  Future movies may not be sequels but movies that focus on fringe characters. Disney also believes there is potential for a television series.
AnswerKenntnis:
What is now Episode IV was originally released as simply "Star Wars". It was chosen out of all the stories Lucas had come up with in that universe because it was best able to stand alone as a single movie. Had it been only modestly successful as the studio thought it would be (most of the people working on it actually thought it'd bomb), it probably would have been the only Star Wars movie, and Lucas would have either moved on with the Indiana Jones stories he had in the works, or faded into obscurity. As it was, the film was so successful that Lucas could afford to bankroll ESB himself (something not normally done especially at the time, though the model has since been replicated by Spielberg, Cameron and several other prominent screenwriter/directors).
AnswerKenntnis:
Some fantastic answers here, but I thought I'd just add a little more detail, that I don't think has been included in any of the others. Firstly, as has already been said, STAR WARS was only ever one film. Vader wasn't Luke's father, Leia wasn't Luke's sister, no further films were planned.

Even the original 1977 opening crawl looked like this:



That's right. No "Episode IV : A New Hope".

It's difficult to remember now, but STAR WARS was HUGE. I mean TITANIC big. Adjusted for inflation it's actually still the second highest grossing movie of all-time (AVATAR is only number 14).

So Lucas and his friends set to work on expanding the universe, much like the Wachowski's did with THE MATRIX. Lucas's "second in command", from the beginning of his Hollywood career, was a man called Gary Kurtz. Kurtz produced Lucas's first "Hollywood" feature, AMERICAN GRAFITTI, which in itself was a big success (currently 44 on the highest grossing films of all time list), STAR WARS, and THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK.

Lucas worked with Kurtz (and many others) on producing a rough outlines for approximately 8 more movies, making 9 in total. The EMPIRE STRIKES BACK was made according to this plan.

After the success of RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK (the project Lucas put together with Steven Spielberg), Lucas decided that cinema-goers wanted more of a rollercoaster action movie, and so changed the 9 movie plan.

Kurtz and Lucas were at logger-heads over a lot of things. Some of them technical, some of them artistic. According to Kurtz they agreed they should go their separate ways before RETURN OF THE JEDI began, with Kurtz taking the opportunity to work with Jim Henson on THE DARK CRYSTAL.

However, since Kurtz was so intricately involved in the evolution of STAR WARS into something bigger, he's a great source. According to him, the outlines for the nine movies went like something this:


  
  EPISODE 1: Was to focus on the origins of the Jedi Knights and how they are initiated and trained
  EPISODE 2: Introduction and development of Obi-Wan Kenobi
  EPISODE 3: Introduction and life of Vader
  EPISODE 4: There were seven different drafts of the film. At one point, they pursued buying the rights to Hidden Fortress because of the strong similarities. At one point, Luke was a female, Han was Luke's brother, Luke's father was the one in prison (interesting point for some debates) and the film featured 40 wookies
  EPISODE 5: Once written, the screenplay of Empire is almost exactly what is seen on screen. The only cut scenes were those involving wampas in the rebel base (cut because of time and unsolved technical glitches) and about two minutes of Luke/Yoda Jedi training with no real dialog.
  EPISODE 6: Leia was to be elected "Queen of her people" leaving her isolated. Han was to die. Luke confronted Vader and went on with his life alone. Leia was not to be Luke's sister.
  EPISODE 7: Third trilogy was to focus on Luke's life as a Jedi, with very few details planned out.
  EPISODE 8: Luke's sister (not Leia) appears from another part of the galaxy.
  EPISODE 9: First appearance of the Emperor.
  


(I believe he went into greater detail in an issue of SFX magazine, but I've been unable to find a copy of the text on the internet... I bet it's there somewhere!)

There's also a great interview with Kurtz here, where he goes into a bit more detail:


  The one story thread [in Return of the Jedi] that got totally tossed out the window, which was really pretty important I think, was the one of Vader trying to convince Luke to join him to overthrow the Emperor. That together they had enough power that they could do that, and it wasnΓÇÖt him saying I want to take over the world and be the evil leader, it was that transition. It was Vader saying, ΓÇ£IΓÇÖm looking again at what IΓÇÖve done and where my life has gone and who IΓÇÖve served and, very much in the Samurai tradition, and saying if I can join forces with my son, who is just as strong as I am, that maybe we can make some amends.ΓÇ¥ So there was all of that going on in Jedi as well, that was supposed to go on. So the story was quite a bit more poignant and the ending was the coronation of Leia as the queen of what was left of her people, to take over the royal symbol. That meant she was then isolated from all of the rest and Luke went off then by himself. It was basically a kind of bittersweet ending. SheΓÇÖs not his sister that dropped in to wrap up everything neatly. His sister was someone else way over on the other side of the galaxy and she wasnΓÇÖt going to show up until the next episode.


Read more: http://www.filmthreat.com/interviews/8/#ixzz2Fcy0psgB
QuestionKenntnis:
Invisibility should cause blindness: how does hard sf cope?
qn_description:
One problem I've always thought of with science fiction characters becoming invisible is that they should go blind, because their retina does not catch any light.

Obviously a lot of soft SF or fantasy would gloss over this. But I'm sure that hard SF authors have had a go at it. How can invisibility and sight be reconciled?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
H.G. Wells' The Invisible Man (the original) dealt with it. The eponymous character tests his formula on a cat first, and the author notes 'there remained two little ghosts of her eyes'.

I seem to recall from somewhere that he injects his eyeballs with something to achieve the effect.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the Recluce universe, LE Modesitt Jr deals with this.  his "Order Mages" can bend light to become invisible. When they do, they are also blinded because they can not see.  

EDIT

I have also remembered the TV show Invisible Man (aka I-Man) dealt with this as well.  the "I-Man", when invisible, could not see in the "normal" spectrum of light.  In the show, they hypothesized that he "saw" in the infra-red spectrum.  They often leveraged this "fact" in the show.
AnswerKenntnis:
In Warren Ellis's Planetary he specifically addresses this with his version of the Invisible Woman from the Fantastic Four. She needs special goggles to see -- otherwise she's blind while invisible. 

A variant can be found in James Alan Gardner's books Expendable and Ascending. One of the characters, Oar, is translucent to humans. However, it's made clear that this was only applicable in the wavelengths of normal human eyesight, and she's not completely invisible.
AnswerKenntnis:
This is actually the punch line of a short story (I guess by Robert Sheckley, but may also be Arthur C. Clarke's 'Tales From The White Hart'). It evolves at a bar where a guest confesses to another that he once helped an alien of a race that is known for its generosity with a paperclip and is granted a wish. He asks for being invisible once a day for an hour and is persuaded by the other guest to stay on until it happens. He stays put at bar stool eventually  becoming both invisible and blind.
AnswerKenntnis:
Well, there is one kind of invisibility that alleviates the problem. If you don't bend the light but absorb it and create it anew on the other side of the body you want to conceal, then you can do whatever you want inside, including displaying the outside world. This is nicely implemented in Ghost in the Shell.



            
                
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
            

You'd still need some way to record the light hitting you but that's plausible with something like distributed light field technology that could in principle use a large number of microscopic, lens-free sensors.
QuestionKenntnis:
Is Slytherin Evil?
qn_description:
Maybe I'm just hearing the wrong comments, but it seems that Slytherin is considered a dark house by almost everyone.  I know when both reading the books and watching the movies, I always had a feeling of foreboding when there were a number of Slytherin house members around or the time when Harry and friends went into Slytherin and felt this feeling was emphasized by the writing and film directing.

We hear very little positive about Slytherin (other than the repeated line that Harry would be a great wizard if he went in Slytherin) and there really isn't a list of great wizards who were in Slytherin House.

Even in the movie Deathly Hallows (I can't check the book - I loaned it to my sister 3 weeks after it was published and haven't seen it since!), McGonagall specifically asks Filtch to lead all the Slytherin students into the dungeon while Hogwarts is under siege by Voldemort.  She doesn't specify that any Slytherin students remain behind to help fight.

Is this intentional?  Did JKR intentionally create a bad reputation and not present any counter-examples so we'd believe all of Slytherin was bad?

Most characters in the Potter-verse are complex.  While we can admire James and Lily Potter, we also see how James teased and taunted Snape, showing us a harsh side of James, and we see that there is good in Snape.  We even see complexity in Voldemort as a villain who is mixed-blood, but hates those of mixed blood and wants purity for all witches and wizards.

With all the complex characters, it seems odd that there is essentially nothing to redeem the House of Slytherin - which is not just one character, but is a group represented by a number of characters.  But yet it seems as if it's presented, in both books and movies, as dark and full of schemers and bad people.

Are there indications, and especially more than a few or just tiny ones, that there are a fair number of good witches and wizards in Slytherin?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Let's have a shout out for Slytherin House!

Several great examples have already been given regarding Slytherins that aren't one-dimensional evil villains. Under the spoilers tag is the Slytherin welcome letter from Pottermore (and note that Pottermore is still in beta, so you can only access it if you have a beta account -- some here might, some might not), which contains information relevant to this question. I'm going to edit a few bits, as it's quite a long letter. Here's what J.K. Rowling has to say about Slytherin House:


  Congratulations! IΓÇÖm Prefect Gemma Farley, and IΓÇÖm delighted to welcome you to SLYTHERIN HOUSE. Our emblem is the serpent, the wisest of creatures; our house colours are emerald green and silver, and our common room lies behind a concealed entrance down in the dungeons. As youΓÇÖll see, its windows look out into the depths of the Hogwarts lake. We often see the giant squid swooshing by ΓÇô and sometimes more interesting creatures. We like to feel that our hangout has the aura of a mysterious, underwater shipwreck.
  Now, there are a few things you should know about Slytherin ΓÇô and a few you should forget.
  Firstly, letΓÇÖs dispel a few myths. You might have heard rumours about Slytherin house ΓÇô that weΓÇÖre all into the Dark Arts, and will only talk to you if your great-grandfather was a famous wizard, and rubbish like that. Well, you donΓÇÖt want to believe everything you hear from competing houses. IΓÇÖm not denying that weΓÇÖve produced our share of Dark wizards, but so have the other three houses ΓÇô they just donΓÇÖt like admitting it. And yes, we have traditionally tended to take students who come from long lines of witches and wizards, but nowadays youΓÇÖll find plenty of people in Slytherin house who have at least one Muggle parent.
  HereΓÇÖs a little-known fact that the other three houses donΓÇÖt bring up much: Merlin was a Slytherin. Yes, Merlin himself, the most famous wizard in history! He learned all he knew in this very house! Do you want to follow in the footsteps of Merlin? Or would you rather sit at the old desk of that illustrious ex-Hufflepuff, Eglantine Puffett, inventor of the Self-Soaping Dishcloth?
  I didnΓÇÖt think so.
  But thatΓÇÖs enough about what weΓÇÖre not. LetΓÇÖs talk about what we are, which is the coolest and edgiest house in this school. We play to win, because we care about the honour and traditions of Slytherin.
  We also get respect from our fellow students. Yes, some of that respect might be tinged with fear, because of our Dark reputation, but you know what? It can be fun, having a reputation for walking on the wild side. Chuck out a few hints that youΓÇÖve got access to a whole library of curses, and see whether anyone feels like nicking your pencil case.
  But weΓÇÖre not bad people. WeΓÇÖre like our emblem, the snake: sleek, powerful, and frequently misunderstood.
  For instance, we Slytherins look after our own ΓÇô which is more than you can say for Ravenclaw. Apart from being the biggest bunch of swots you ever met, Ravenclaws are famous for clambering over each other to get good marks, whereas we Slytherins are brothers. The corridors of Hogwarts can throw up surprises for the unwary, and youΓÇÖll be glad youΓÇÖve got the Serpents on your side as you move around the school. As far as weΓÇÖre concerned, once youΓÇÖve become a snake, youΓÇÖre one of ours ΓÇô one of the elite.
  Because you know what Salazar Slytherin looked for in his chosen students? The seeds of greatness. YouΓÇÖve been chosen by this house because youΓÇÖve got the potential to be great, in the true sense of the word. All right, you might see a couple of people hanging around the common room whom you might not think are destined for anything special. Well, keep that to yourself. If the Sorting Hat put them in here, thereΓÇÖs something great about them, and donΓÇÖt you forget it.


Examples of Slytherins who were not evil:


Horace Slughorn -- Potions Master and Head of House for Slytherin once Snape became Headmaster.
Severus Snape -- gave his life in the service of the Order of the Phoenix.
Andromeda Black Tonks -- Sister of Bellatrix Black Lestrange and Narcissa Black Malfoy, married a Muggleborn, Ted Tonks, despite being written off by her family.
Regulus Black -- Brother to Sirius Black. Regulus joined the Death Eaters at a very young age, but found he was in over his head. He ultimately discovered Voldemort was making Horcruxes and stole the Slytherin locket Horcrux, replacing it with a fake Horcrux.
Phineas Nigellus -- Slytherin Hogwarts Headmaster portrait. Phineas seems to be helpful to Dumbledore, although he is snide, prejudiced, and judgmental of others.
Draco Malfoy -- While not a nice guy, Draco chooses not to turn the trio over to the Death Eaters when they were captured by Fenrir Greyback in Deathly Hallows, and he chooses to not kill Dumbledore in Half-Blood Prince, risking death at the hand of Voldemort each time.
Theodore Nott -- "Raised by a very elderly widower and Death Eater father, Theodore is a clever loner who does not feel the need to join gangs, including Malfoy's. Theodore is just as pure-blooded as [Draco] is, and somewhat cleverer" J.K. Rowling


Slytherin students are cunning, ambitious, resourceful, determined, and have a certain disregard for the rules ;)

ETA: Someone in the comments indicated he/she doesn't think J.K. Rowling wrote the Slytherin House greeting letter. I think she did, but all I can offer is this screenshot of Pottermore's Sorting Hat page that appears before you click on the link to get your welcome letter: (POTTERMORE SPOILERS) || LINK ||
AnswerKenntnis:
There are definitely examples of non-evil Slytherins (Such as Nymphadora Tonks' mother Andromeda Black, who married muggleborn Ted Tonks and later raised Lupin and Tonks' son; or Professor Slughorn), as well as complicated ones (RAB/Regulus Black, Severus Snape). 

As a matter of fact, there's pretty much no evidence that Salazar Slytherin himself (the founder of the house) was a dark wizard (see " Was Salazar Slytherin a Dark Wizard? "). He wasn't necessarily a paragon of virtue, but he wasn't Voldemort of the past either.

Also, please note that Slytherin house members as depicted in Rowling books are all essentially from a period of 2 civil wars in the wizarding world, and many Slytherins joined Voldemort for a variety of reasons - see " Why exactly do the Death-Eaters serve Lord Voldemort? ") , so many of them may have been complex and not wholly evil people. There were plenty of non-evil people fighting on the side of what we consider "evil" in many civil wars (as a random famous example, Robert E. Lee was himself opposed to slavery). 

As a further consideration, the numbers are a bit misleading for 2 reasons:


As estimated here ( How many people actually participated in the original Voldemort conflict? ), at most 20% of Wizarding world participated in the war. While almost all Death Eaters were Slytherins, as per Hagrid - it doesn't imply that ALL of Slytherins were Death eaters. If we assume that each house produces 25% of the population, that means 10% (e.g. 2/5th of Slytherin House's 25%) were fighting for Voldemort. We don't know anything  about the remaining 3/5th of Slytherins (15% of population). And as noted above, this is even AFTER the examples are severely skewed by the fact that there's a major civil war going on.
We don't know the house of many of the characters, and can't even always properly deduce one, either due to insufficient characterization, or because - as Harry Potter or Neville Longbottom show - the house assignment is not always a clear-cut decision and can sometimes be misleading if one tries to deduce the house from the character of a person.
Even the evidence you cite (McGonagall specifically asks Filtch to lead all the Slytherin students into the dungeon while Hogwarts is under siege by Voldemort) should be analyzed carefully, since anyone not of age was supposed to be going whether they were evil or not. So the only group to which your logic clearly applies are Harry's year Slytherins - many of whom are probably kids of Death Eaters and thus predictably raised this way independently of their innate evilness.
AnswerKenntnis:
Slytherin isn't evil, only highly ambitious, above anything else. This trait leads them to abuse the power that comes naturally, ignoring other people and whatnot in the process.

Also of note is that Voldemort was Slytherin. He no doubt shaped the reputation of the house for some time to come after. He recruited from Slytherin, who were all in his power. They no doubt influenced those still at Hogwards, as Malfoy influenced his son.

But, it should most certainly be noted that not everyone from from Slytherin is evil. Professor Slughorn fought against Voldemort in the final battle, and can generally be said to be a good person all around. Malfoy, while not the best person in the series, certainly wasn't evil, only misguided and a bit of a bully.
AnswerKenntnis:
The quote from Sorcerer's Stone - "There hasn't been a witch or wizard gone bad who wasn't in Slytherin" - is misleading; it doesn't mean that ALL Slytherins become Death Eaters or other evil people, but that the prized qualities of a Slytherin - ambition, resourcefulness, the "seeds of greatness" - are also qualities that can lead to a person being selfish, uncaring, and a user/abuser of others, qualities that even in moderation we deem to be evidence of evil.

The Pottermore welcome letter for Slytherin House mentions that other Houses have produced Dark wizards. The books do not mention any notables, with the possible exception of the Gray Lady (Helena Ravenclaw), who was ambitious to the point of stealing her mother's diadem, a treasure said to imbue great wisdom on the wearer. Whether that qualifies her as dark or evil is up for debate. Dumbledore, at one point, certainly thought like a Slytherin, before Ariana's death and Grindelwald's bloody rise to power showed him the error of his ways.

The point is that Slytherin is not the source of evil, and it does not produce or imbue evil upon its students. It can attract evil, certainly, but so could a house like Ravenclaw, or even Gryffindor. And plenty of Slytherins leave school and don't start out collecting cursed artifacts or killing Mudbloods and Muggles (Horace Slughorn, even with various character flaws in the books and movies, isn't Dark by any stretch). So no, I don't think the house is inherently evil. It just has a bit more of a reputation to live down.
AnswerKenntnis:
What I think, and as a pottermore slytherin what I say to my friends when they start calling me evil, is that the Harry Potter books were written about the 2 civil wizarding wars, and naturally from the winners' point of view.

It is fairly safe to say that yes, Voldemort was evil. BUT - he was just one Slytherin. Naturally, he was followed by his closest friends, who were his housemates, but you can see that there were also members of the other houses who followed him. It was a griffindor, no less, who had become his most loyal servant.
Anyway, well, usually war creates hatred. It happens through an attempt to prevent future occurrences of the same thing. They look for "what might have caused this?", and the easiest thing is "where the enemy came from". This time it was slytherin. So they demonized slytherin.

In reality, slytherin is as bad as any other house. They all created great wizards and great dark wizards, they just don't talk about it.
AnswerKenntnis:
I love the question and how it has been answered by other people, so there is not really much to do unless giving my condensed point of view: "Slytherin is not about evil, it's about power!"
It's HOW you get the power which makes the real difference between good and evil!
AnswerKenntnis:
Well, I think what Rowling was intended to do. If Voldemort is representative of Hitler, and The Second Wizarding War is representative of World War II, then McGonnagal locking all the Slytherins into the dungeon without disgression must be representative of The Japanese Internment Camps. I think the one dimensional hatred instilled in us as the readers, and the same one dimensional hatred experienced by many non-Slytherins towards Slytherin is like human nature during intense Nationalistic Conflicts. Many witches and wizards like McGonnagal are acting like how many people act under the fallacy that if The enemies are all Slytherins, then all of Slytherin is the enemy.
AnswerKenntnis:
If JKR wrote the welcome letter, then she contradicted herself. In The Sorcerer's Stone, Ron tells Harry that there wasn't a witch or wizard that went bad that wasn't in Slytherin. Which would mean the letter is wrong in saying the other three houses produced their share of dark wizards. 

As others have mentioned, not all Slytherins are evil. But all evil wizards are Slytherin.
QuestionKenntnis:
Why is Tony Stark in the Iron Man suit unaffected by G-forces, inertia and blunt force trauma?
qn_description:
Tony's suit is an engineering marvel, and they explain many facets of the technology to help give legitimacy to the special powers, abilities and weapons it has.

I never read the Iron Man comics, but in the movie they really don't have a technological explanation for how he miraculously seems to be unaffected by crushing G-forces of sudden acceleration, the inertia of sudden stops and hair-pin turns, and especially the blunt force trauma from getting smashed in the face with Thor's hammer.

Certainly it appears the suit takes punishment, but Tony always remains unscatched, never a collapsed lung, broken bone or even a bloody nose.

In my infantile understanding of theoretical physics, the same technology that would be used to counter G-forces and sudden blunt force trauma to the body inside would be the very same technology used for Anti-Gravity which in my honest opinion would be a much more stunning technological achievement than his heralded Arc Reactor.

Was their ever an explanation proferred for this and if so was it indeed attributed to Anti-Gravity?
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
There is no good answer for why the Iron Man armor provides both the level of protection that it does (it has resisted blows from Thor's hammer and the fists of the Hulk, for example) without transferring any of that damage to the more fragile body of Tony Stark beneath the armor. 

In the example below, Iron Man is wearing one of his Hulkbuster armors, which were heavier and provided better protection than his mainstream armors. But even his mainstream armors are capable of taking an incredible amount of physical punishment before failing.



Early armors (the first grey, and later gold armor, the Mark I and Mark II) appeared to function like plate mail, an armor over another armor, they were large enough and bulky enough for there to be an (undisclosed) under-padding that should have provided some insulation against physical damage. But by the time the first red and gold armors were being seen, there was simply not enough armor left to explain how the suit provided blunt force trama reduction against the enemies Iron Man was fighting.



So we we're left to decide exactly how his armor did provide protection. The briefcase armor, for example was able to fit in a briefcase and did claim to possess an anti-gravity emitter making it able to be carried, since back then, the armor did have some weight to it. It was the boots, gloves and helmet. Tony wore the breastplate and shorts under his street clothes. This was still during the era when Tony could not take off the armor without risk of dying.



The golden armor was stored inside the boots and gloves. It extruded and connected with the central power core in the breastplate. Once charged, the armor was filled with an electromagnetic repulsive force that hardened the suit making it a suit of armor. Perhaps it is this repulsive force (as well as the gravity emitter that was used in the briefcase technology) that made the armor capable of resisting damage with any form of under armor and added to its flight stability; basically it was an armor-assisted invisible force-field.



To be fair to the writers of the time, none of these things were important enough to dwell on, this was the era of the "transistor-powered" armors and "transistor powered, energy generating" roller skates used in several stories. The writers then weren't significantly saavy with technology and transistors to know they didn't power ANYTHING... We knew what they were trying to accomplish and hand-waved it through.



This hand-waving has continued on into today's writing where we talk about the Extremis armor and its nanotechnological makeup. As well as it being stored within the skeletal structure of his body and having an antigravity/repulsor power source that is always on and instantly available (a.k.a. arc reactor). Curiously enough, this armor does show some level of underarmor that could act as a form of buffer to the fleshy meat parts encased within. But very few of the many armor designs made that clear. 

The movie armor that swoops in behind Tony to save him from falling did seem to be rather bulky and I would like to think in a perfect world there is a mixture of armor, padding, force-fields, hyper-oxygenation and fitness keeping Tony from being crushed by the g-forces of those amazingly tight turns and incredible amounts of physical abuse he suffers during the movie.
AnswerKenntnis:
This is essentially a plot hole.  In the first film, they treat him as almost invulnerable while in the suit.  However, the same suit is presented as being simply a mechanical suit with repulsors in the hands and feet, along with a few other weapons.  After his mission in Gulmira, Pepper asks him 'are those bullet holes?' which indicates bullets are capable of penetrating the outer shell.  But there's nothing underneath that outer shell that was designed to provide protection, it's just the harness and mechanical bits below the outer shell.  They explicitly acknowledge here that the suit is not invulnerable, but don't follow the logic through properly with an explanation for how Stark is undamaged.

The only real threat to him in the first film is the threat of being physically crushed by the Iron Monger, as the suit is presented to provide protection from the weaponry of the Iron Monger.  While testing the Mark II, he does pull a Gwen Stacey style last-moment save after the suit ices over, which probably should have killed him from the G-forces.  While in Gulmira, a tank shoots him down, he plummets from tens of feet in the air and gets up without injury.

In the second film, Whiplash's whips seem to be powerful enough to damage the suit, although again, the damage seems to damage the outer shell and weaken functionality of the suit, but there's no piercing of the suit to the squishy Stark center.  Similarly, in The Avengers, the suit takes a pretty massive beating, but no scratches on Stark himself (and again he does a last-minute save which should have caused him damage from the G-forces).  The especially egregious example of this from The Avengers is in


   the Helicarrier attack sequence.  He works with Captain America to fix one of the Helicarrier's turbines.  Upon starting it back up, he gets sucked into the turbine and chewed up.  Once he escapes, the suit's all scratched up, but he doesn't have so much as a bruise or a broken limb.


When he's in the suit, it's presented as though the suit takes all the damage, and he's fine afterwards.  In addition, the suit's integrity is never compromised, no enemy manages to hack through the armor to expose Stark underneath.  At least in the comics they go through the effort of explaining the suit as being capable of generating force fields, magnetic/anti-gravity fields, or some other technobabble.  The movies instead present a physically grounded design for the suit, then grant him implausible invulnerability while he's wearing it.
AnswerKenntnis:
There is no good explanation for this. The Iron Man suit does not appear to have any particular form of insulation that would defend Tony against feeling like a tooth in an empty tin can during some of those instances you mention. Fiction is fiction, and likely the closer we got to your answer the closer we'd get to some ridiculous weapons.

As for defense against impact, I'm assuming the suit is made of a metal with qualities similar to wolverines adamantium - or that there is some additional effect caused by the suit being "whole" which produced a force field local to the surface of the suit.

If any have seen the Iron Man cartoon back in th early 90's (where Iron Man constantly went up against the Mandarin) there was a "magic like" effect to the suit, when it was fully put on that didn't seem to exist when it was deactivated in pieces. In particular, the suit, in pieces, seemed to have "cloth" like attributes, being bendy, and fitting into a normal suitcase. However, when Tony on the suit, it suddenly becomes hard as IRON, making one believe that the electric interconnectivity of all the pieces  comes into play.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the comics he is quite frequently subject to a lot of body damage. Usually, walking away (or being carried away) after getting his ass handed to him until right at the last moment resulted in broken ribs and bones. He also stated that the suit injects painkillers into the affect areas upon damage.

As for the initial question of him not being affected by g-force in the films in the second film, where he is being chased by Hammer drones and decides to fly through the Stark expo big globe thing, he plots a course and then JARVIS says something along the lines of 'AirBag deployed.'

Hope that clears some things up.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the Ultimate Version they have answered this issue by showing Tony being insulated by a green liquid/gel of some sort that serves as the cushion/shock absorb-er between him and the rest of the Iron Man systems.  In the 616 universe (Main Marvel Universe) when Tony had his Extremis abilities he had a healing factor on a similar level to Wolverine that would have accounted for blunt force trauma, g-force debilitation. With the new "Bleeding Edge" suit he now employs being made of nano-machines that he excretes from the pores of his skin it's probable that his healing factor is still in play.
QuestionKenntnis:
How did Dumbledore, or anyone, know Lily had sacrificed herself for Harry?
qn_description:
There were no witnesses, except for Harry, who was still a baby and didn't relive / remember the experience until much later. James and Lily were both dead, Voldemort was not quite dead but not much better and not likely to tell anyone what happened.

So how did Dumbledore, or anyone, know that Lily sacrificed herself for Harry?

Keep in mind that even finding out what happened in a more general sense, that James and Lily had died and Voldemort had been killed by a rebounding killing curse, was difficult enough.  

Of course, it would be clear they had died defending their family, themselves and Harry, but nothing found at the scene would have told anyone that Lily had been given the choice to live, but did not take it. Perhaps James had been given the same choice, but declined as well. Or — less likely — perhaps he was the only one given the choice, while Lily was killed right away.

Yet Dumbledore seems to have known, as shown in this quote (emphasis mine):


  But I knew, too, where Voldemort was weak. And so I made my decision. You would be protected by an ancient magic of which he knows, which he despises, and which he has always, therefore, underestimated — to his cost. I am speaking, of course, of the fact that your mother died to save you. She gave you a lingering protection he never expected, a protection that flows in your veins to this day. I put my trust, therefore, in your motherΓÇÖs blood. I delivered you to her sister, her only remaining relative.
  
  She may have taken you grudgingly, furiously, unwillingly, bitterly, yet still she took you, and in doing so, she sealed the charm I placed upon you. Your motherΓÇÖs sacrifice made the bond of blood the strongest shield I could give you.
  
  Order of the Phoenix, Chapter 37. Thanks to Anthony Grist for pointing out.


Here, Dumbledore talks about Lily's sacrifice, specifically her sacrifice, not just dying defending him, as what happened to James. Since James is delivered to the Dursleys within 24 hours, Dumbledore must have found out within that time span. And he must have known with enough confidence to base the entire protection of Harry upon that fact.



This question has been asked on Quora, however, I can't read beyond the first answer there and even if I signed up to read all answers, from what I've heard, Quora doesn't seem to be the most reliable source.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
I think the answer is likely a combination of everybody's favourite Potions master, Severus Snape, and some solid guesswork on Dumbledore's part. Dumbledore knew even before their deaths that Snape had asked Voldemort to spare Lily's life:


  ΓÇ£If she means so much to you,ΓÇ¥ said Dumbledore, ΓÇ£surely Lord Voldemort will spare her? Could you not ask for mercy for the mother, in exchange for the son?ΓÇ¥
  
  ΓÇ£I have ΓÇö I have asked him ΓÇöΓÇ¥
  
  ...
  
  The hilltop faded, and Harry stood in DumbledoreΓÇÖs office, and something was making a terrible sound, like a wounded animal. Snape was slumped forward in a chair and Dumbledore was standing over him, looking grim. After a moment or two, Snape raised his face, and he looked like a man who had lived a hundred years of misery since leaving the wild hilltop.
  
  ΓÇ£I thought ΓÇª you were going ΓÇª to keep her ΓÇª safe. ΓÇªΓÇ¥
  
  ΓÇ£She and James put their faith in the wrong person,ΓÇ¥ said Dumbledore. ΓÇ£Rather like you, Severus. WerenΓÇÖt you hoping that Lord Voldemort would spare her?ΓÇ¥
  
  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Chapter 33 - The Prince's Tale


Clearly they believed, for whatever reason, that Voldemort would keep his word. From there it's not a big leap to conclude that, since she had also been killed, she'd refused his offer to save herself.
AnswerKenntnis:
There is no reason why the Penseive would not work on an infant. Harry could see and hear what was happening, even if he couldn't understand it.

So Dumbledore could have watched the whole thing from Harry's point of view and learned exactly what happened.

(One could argue that a baby's vision and memory are not fully developed, but the magic of the Penseive might be able to overcome that. Frankly if you are going to talk about scientifically implausible events in Harry Potter this would be a long way down the list.)
AnswerKenntnis:
"You all know that on the night I lost my powers and my body, I tried to kill him. His mother died in the attempt to save him - and unwittingly provided him with a protection I admit I had not foreseen. ... I could not touch the boy."
  
  ...
  
  "His mother left upon him the traces other sacrifice. This is old magic, I should
  have remembered it, I was foolish to overlook it. but no matter. I can touch him
  now."
  
  Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire Pg.421


We have traces from around the entire story that Voldemort is known to overlook things. Specially, at that time, he was over-confident at his powers.


  They, who had seen proofs of the immensity of my power in the times when I was
  mightier than any wizard living?
  
  Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire Pg.421


He lived with a false interpretation that no one is more clever than him. Thats why he said:


  I knew wizards everywhere would one day fear to speak, when I had become the greatest sorcerer in the world!
  
  Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets Pg.314


Dumbledore on the other hand is careful enough to admire every aspect of the situation and then come to a decision. He is pretty clever in real. If Voldemort could know that it is an old magic, then why not Dumbledore?

Not to mention, Dumbledore did not instantly come to a decision. It took him time. One of the first appearances of his possible clues were in the first book:


  "But why couldn't Quirrell touch me?"
  
  "Your mother died to save you. If there is one thing Voldemort cannot understand, it is love. He didn't realize that love as powerful as your mother's for you leaves its own mark. Not a scar, no visible sign... to have been loved so deeply, even though the person who loved us is gone, will give us some protection forever. It is in your very skin.
  
  Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone Pg.241


So, I guess. This must be a magic, popularity of which is similar to that of a Horcrux. It wasn't something very much unknown, but it was known only to those who had gone deep into the studies of magic. Dumbledore and Voldemort, both qualify to this category, only difference is Voldemort is ignorant, foolish, idiot and over-confident (and evil ofcourse).

It won't be extremely difficult for him to know this. There were other clues as well, see Anthony Grist's answer.

If Dumbledore can workout the location of a Horcrux heavily armed from traces of magic, this isn't difficult.


  ΓÇ£And you knew this? You knewΓÇöall along?ΓÇ¥
  
  ΓÇ£I guessed. But my guesses have usually been good,ΓÇ¥ said Dumbledore happily, and they sat in silence for what seemed like a long time, while the creature behind them continued to
  whimper and tremble.
  
  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Pg.593
AnswerKenntnis:
If Lily hadn't sacrificed herself for Harry's life then even Harry would have been dead.   

Since Harry was not dead & Voldemort was sort of dead, it would be easy for a mind like Dumbledore's to deduce that Lily used the magic of love & sacrifice to protect Harry. No other magic could deflect Avada Kedavra.
AnswerKenntnis:
For a Pottercast interview in 2007, JK Rowling addresses this question in part (edited for clarity):


  SU: How did Dumbledore find out about what happened in Godric's Hollow?
  
  MA: And what happened? There's this whole twenty four hours that people have been fantasising about for years.
  
  JKR: Obviously Dumbledore could cast a spell on a dwelling that would immediately alert him if something happened to it. (SU: Oh.) So he could know instantaneously. That's not a problem at all. And then he could dispatch Hagrid and so on.


She doesnΓÇÖt go into details about what this spell entails, but I think it was probably a significant factor. I think it certainly would have told him that Voldemort had attacked the house, and probably that somebody had survived (using a remote variant of hominem revelio).

Personally I think this spell was akin to an aircraft flight recorder, or a ΓÇ£black boxΓÇ¥. It was recording events at the house (audio would probably be sufficient, but it probably also monitored magic within the house), and it alerted Dumbledore when Voldemort arrived. He was able to playback the recording after the fact, and used his considerable knowledge to deduce what happened.

This means he would have known what had happened (and what to do next) almost immediately, which is consistent with the canon. ItΓÇÖs only a guess, but itΓÇÖs the best IΓÇÖve got.



I also briefly considered legilimency and/or use of HarryΓÇÖs memories in the Pensieve. I discarded this theory on two grounds:


ItΓÇÖs inconsistent with the sequence of events. If Hagrid and DumbledoreΓÇÖs reports are accurate, then the first time Dumbledore sees Harry after the attack is when Hagrid brings him to Little Whinging. This means there's no opportunity for Dumbledore to inspect his memories, and thus no reason for him to bring them to the Dursleys.
ItΓÇÖs potentially traumatising for Harry. The use of legilimency we see in Half-Blood Prince sees Harry reliving the memories that SnapeΓÇÖs inspecting. Even if Dumbledore could inspect HarryΓÇÖs memories before taking him to the Dursleys, I think thereΓÇÖs a risk of further damage if heΓÇÖs forced to relive his parentsΓÇÖ death just hours after it happened. I donΓÇÖt think Dumbledore would want to risk it.
AnswerKenntnis:
When lily died, she was standing in front of harry's crib. So that's where her body would be when hagrid went there. A genius like Dumbledore would've worked that out.
AnswerKenntnis:
Voldemort himself told Harry, in the Philosopher's Stone (Sorcerer's Stone to you American folk).

A small extract from page 213 in the chapter "The Man with Two Faces":


  'How touching ...' it hissed. 'I always value bravery ... Yes, boy,
  your parents were brave ... I killed your father first and he put up a
  courageous fight ... but your mother needn't have died ... she was
  trying to protect you ...'


Nowhere previously in the book does it say this, and to expand on Awal Garg's quote from his answer:


  "But why couldn't Quirrell touch me?"
  
  "Your mother died to save you. If there is one thing Voldemort cannot
  understand, it is love. He didn't realize that love as powerful as
  your mother's for you leaves its own mark. Not a scar, no visible
  sign... to have been loved so deeply, even though the person who loved
  us is gone, will give us some protection forever. It is in your very
  skin.


In the paragraph prior to this one (in the book- page 216):


  'Well ... Voldemort said that he only killed my mother because she
  tried to stop him killing me.'


Harry recalls to Dumbledore what Voldemort had told Harry about Lily dying to protect Harry, therefore we can conclude that Lily sacrificed herself for Harry.
AnswerKenntnis:
I think it was assumed because a Mother's Love for her child can be stronger than a father's because it was the mother who created the child's life, that added attachment might have been the only thing which protected Harry from Avada Kedavra (so James using his love for Harry wouldn't have worked).

So how does the above explain how anyone knew it was Lily who scarified herself, well obviously someone found them dead and Harry alive and there must have been some sort of investigation to confirm Voldemort was there as well. 

Now if Lily was closer to Harry's crib then one could assume that it was her, even if she only got closer to the crib than James because of the Target Recoil from Avada Kedavra (Because Avada Kedavra kills instantly, she wouldn't have crawled there) the first paragraph explains why it would be logical to rule out the father. 

there's also the common perception when it comes to the parents roles for protecting their family. The Father protects the entire family as the front line, the Mother protect the children as the back and last line, only getting involved if there is no one else

Dumbledore does indicate that it was Voldemort's lack on insight in seeing that Avada Kedavra isn't as absolute as he may have believed which lead to his inital downfall (failing to see there was a magic more power than a killing curse), once again this goes back to the first paragraph in assuming it was Lily

ofcause all of this depends on your definition of sacrificed in this situation. this answer assumes that Lily and James disregarded the innate human nature of self-preservation, knowing full well they would die, chose to fight/protect someone else who meant more to them than their own lives

NOTE: the other definition of sacrificed in this situation would be that Lily committed suicide in order to use the protection, like in Vampire Knight when Yuki's mother Juri sacrifices her life in this way to turn Yuki into a human to hide her from Rido (as at the time Haruka and Lord Kaname are fighting Rido and Rido is defeated before he enters the estate so he never reach Juri or Yuki), however my answer does not rely on this (added this to explain the previous paragraph)
QuestionKenntnis:
Which was the first novel set in universes where P=NP?
qn_description:
I wonder whether anyone has written a novel set in a universe where P=NP, in the event that there is more than one, which was the first?



In this universe all problems that could be verified in polynomial time (NP) (given the solution) could also be solved in polynomial time (P).
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Charles Stross wrote a short story called "Antibodies" that hinges on the fact that solving P=NP is a required prerequisite for developing a computer intelligence. It's available in his book Toast. Stross has put the full text of this book online. (This link will take you directly to the story.)

And according to Stross's site, the story was:


  Published in Interzone #157; republished in "The Year's Best Science Fiction #18" (ed. Gardner Dozois). Mentioned in Locus' "Recommended Reading List" for 2000.
  Shortlisted for the 2001 Theodore Sturgeon Award (lost to Ian MacDonald's "Tendoleo's Story").
AnswerKenntnis:
P=NP in the Star Trek universe, but the people there aren't aware of it.  Evidence:


There is encryption but it is always breakable.  P=NP will let you crack everything but one-time pads but the Federation stubbornly continues to use NP-based ciphers.
The efficacy of the universal translator.  P=NP would make learning new languages a breeze, at least for a computer.  Learning systems would be so simple and straightforward to implement that there wouldn't be a linguist left with a job.
The efficacy of the bio-filter.  The transporter routinely filters unknown organisms, viruses and other hazards when crewmen are beamed aboard ship.  But "bio-filter" is a misleading term as it brings to mind some sort of sieve that catches all the bad stuff and passes only the good.  In reality running such a "filter" over transport data would be the mother of all induced subgraph isomorphism problems, as you would have to identify all virus-sized structures in an organism chock-full of such structures.  P=NP magicks away the input-related exponent that makes such problems intractable even for small graphs.
Self-aware machine intelligence is created with ease.  Wesley Crusher created one by accident.  So did Richard Daystrom.  The Enterprise D computer cooked up Moriarty in its spare cycles, Dr. Farallon created the Exocomps, and so on.  All you seem to need to do is build something equivalent to a theorem proving system and let it run long enough to stumble over the proof that P or some other tractable class is equivalent to NP and the system is off to the races.


Or perhaps the Star Trek denizens are collapsing the polynomial hierarchy by technological means.  The Federation, Borg, etc. seem to have ready access to time machines, wormholes, exotic matter, and superluminal signalling, so they could be using closed time-like curves for computation.  This according to Scott Aaronson would allow them efficiently solve PSPACE-complete problems.
AnswerKenntnis:
The other Stross book that deals with this is The Atrocity Archives, where Alan Turing solved P=NP, but they then found that doing so allowed access to the Cthonic Realms, so now an entire branch of Government exists to prevent this discovery becoming public knowledge.
AnswerKenntnis:
In Vernor Vinges "Zones of Thought" series ("The Blabber", A Fire Upon the Deep, A Deepness in the Sky and the forthcoming The Children of the Sky), computation is easier in some parts of the galaxy, allowing for things like artificial intelligence and FTL travel. 

It has been speculated (but there's no direct evidence in the books) that P=NP in these zones.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the fanfic Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality by Eliezer S. Yudkowsky, Harry gets a time machine and tries to factor the product of two large prime numbers using this machine, with a somewhat weird result. So it is not completely given that NP=P, but seems probable.
AnswerKenntnis:
Nemesis, From Isaac Asimov talks about imposibilities and the implications of an universe where the laws of physics doesn't apply
AnswerKenntnis:
If I'm not mistaken, in Bob Shaw's 'The Ragged Astronauts', one of the characters spends a bit of time explaining how pi is 3 to another. If pi is 3, I can only imagine what the rest of the physics is like. (I only remember the scene at all because the whole scene was a bit out of place, which was pretty unusual for the book - otherwise it was a neat tale).
AnswerKenntnis:
"The practice effect" by David Brin seems a likely candidate.
QuestionKenntnis:
What was Starbuck?
qn_description:
An angel?


   Towards the end of the Battlestar Gallactica remake she "died" then came back, only to vanish when talking to Lee in the final episode.


UPDATE: All great answers below but I gotta give the check to the one that I think is right, though any could be strong contenders.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
I had assumed she was an angel, or maybe something like a Seraph. The latter would make a nice tie-in to the original series.

Of course, it could easily be she was a loose plot thread. We certainly have no shortage of those in modern TV serials.
AnswerKenntnis:
I believe that Starbuck was a loose plot thread that the writers had a difficult time tying up in a meaningful way.  

The problem probably all started when the staff killed Starbuck off, which worked great dramatically until they realized they lost one of the show's most popular characters.  Then the writers brought Starbuck back with a great mysterious resurrection, making viewers believe she might be a Cylon.  So I'm sure the writers sat around and tried to think up what would top being a Cylon.  And unfortunately they couldn't think of anything so they just BSed their way through the last episode.

Update October 2013 - Ronald Moore talks about Starbuck's fate:


  I liked the idea, conceptually, that her fate was ambiguous because,
  conceptually, we were tying her to whatever the power was that didnΓÇÖt
  like to be called God and was involved from the inception. From the
  miniseries on, thereΓÇÖs definitely something else going on in this
  story, and itΓÇÖs unknowable. I kind of felt like it should be
  unknowable. It felt wrong to give it a neat answer on something that
  was so profound and existential about these people and this situation.
  They were dealing with something that they had trouble defining,
  whether it was gods plural, or God singular, or something else out
  there. Starbuck was in some way representational of that power, or had
  some connection to it, having been brought back from the dead ΓÇö
  literally. I just didnΓÇÖt feel like I wanted to give it a ΓÇ£Oh, thatΓÇÖs
  what this means.ΓÇ¥ It just felt right that that, too, should be
  mysterious and unknowable. ThatΓÇÖs the way I wanted to go. If I called
  her an angel, does that make everybody happy? That just seemed really
  unsatisfying. I donΓÇÖt know what that means. ThatΓÇÖs just putting a
  label on who she is and it doesnΓÇÖt tell me anything more, really.
AnswerKenntnis:
I've always figured she was the same thing that Head Six and Head Baltar were.  Only visible to everyone and unaware of her own status.  And Baltar's line at the end when Six calls their boss "god" seemed to suggest that whatever it was, it wasn't god. 


  You know it doesn't like to be called
  that.


So it seems she was the creation of some sort of very powerful godlike entity.  I imagined it as something like the ascended from Stargate.  Energy being perhaps.  And Head Six, Head Baltar, and Starbuck were all probably also similar beings -- only with out awareness of their abilities.

This is of course, total speculation.  Which is about all any of us can provide in answer unless some book or interview has provided a solid answer.
AnswerKenntnis:
I thought, too, that she was an Angel in keeping in line with the original series.
AnswerKenntnis:
Starbuck was originally a human soldier who died in a crash landing of her viper on Earth, after flying there through the eye of the storm. The Starbuck that returns after her disappearance is not Starbuck at all, but an angel of death in Starbuck's form, sent by God to lead the colonists to Earth and ultimately to help bring about the destruction of cylons and humans alike, save for the few settlers of New Earth.

A.K.A. Deus ex machina
AnswerKenntnis:
I somehow had a theory that she was the child of the lost Cylon, who somehow mysteriously re-appeared. Again, this is just speculation, but that was always my thought.
AnswerKenntnis:
IMHO I think Starbuck resurrected as an angel, Cylon-resurrection wouldn't explain the new Viper :s
AnswerKenntnis:
I had always thought she was the daughter of a Daniel the 7th cylon.  So she might have been the first cylon human hybrid.  Explaining her resurection / dead body on the cylon homeworld requires about as many blue berry muffins as the Angel theory.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the BSG universe 


"angels" like Head(s) Six and Balthar are possible, though invisible and perhaps immaterial, yet
humans can "walk with the gods" on Kobol, and the gods can subsequently escort the survivors of said humans to new solar systems (presumably being material in the process, and perhaps visible)


If those two sorts of beings are both possible, then why presume that Starbuck was an angel. Why couldn't her nature be the same as the nature of the Lords of Kobol (though no doubt of lesser degree)?
AnswerKenntnis:
a script is like a movie set. it appears complete and real but its really lots of patchwork to make it appear that way (especially over multiple seasons) and if you would move the camera a bit to the right, you would immediately notice that its pretty much just covering the scenes and otherwise ends apruptly. its no encyclopedia which covers every detail.

this smells like a simple hole in the plot and it makes about as much sense as j.d. from scrubs getting run over by a steamroller and suddenly reappearing next week after his funeral, with some vague references to angels by the janitor. 

in the ep where starbuck "died" we saw her ship exploding. no uncertanity, no guessing, just bang, which indicates that they really intended her to die at this point. then there was her magical reappearence and this absolutely unlogical wreck on earth with her body in it, which somehow survived the explosion and got teleported there it seems. 

either they became desperate because their ratings were dropping or it was a blatant cliffhanger without any kind of logic, "lost" style, which would even more suck. its also no surprice that the producer claims it was always meant that way. sounds a hell of a lot better than admitting that they made mistakes. george lucas did this all the time when he talked about the starwars movies while there were drastical plot changes all the time during shooting them.
AnswerKenntnis:
Personally, I see two possibilities:


She's a Seraph/Being of Light like in the original series, and that's that
She's an avatar of some kind, and the BSG universe is actually a simulation like Caprica's V-world


These two options aren't necessarily mutually exclusive. After watching Caprica, it would not be a huge stretch to take what is learned through V-world and how the Cylons came to be, then extrapolate that the universe that is presented in BSG is just another abstraction layer above V-world. 

This would explain the hybrids and their prophecies (perhaps they are hooked into the source code of the universe), and would explain the angels and godlike individuals both in the series and in the backstory.

The key difference between the V-world and the BSG universe would be conscious awareness -- V-world participants have consciousness about their external lives, most of the characters presented in BSG do not, and likely do not have lives outside of the simulation. I would posit that Head Six and Head Baltar have awareness and have existences outside of the simulation, and the being that shall not be named "God" is perhaps the architect of the simulation. Starbuck is something of a glitch, or perhaps had been "installed" by "God", and was sent back after exercising her free will to commit suicide because her role was too important. 

This does mean she is literally a Deus Ex Machina entity -- which isn't necessarily a bad thing. I'd hesitate to label anything that can't be understood at face value as "bad writing", not everything can or should be told in a story without abstraction. TV used to be without abstract concepts -- everything was as it was told, and as it has improved as a storytelling media that has begun to melt away and if often incorrectly assumed to be just a result of bad storytelling. I would suggest that her reappearance in season 4 and disappearance at the end of the series is too blatant to be a mistake -- remember, she returned within a few episodes, too few to be a result of fan reaction (plus they filmed her return scene around the same time they filmed her death). 

So, take the obvious anomaly that she is to infer something about the universe the story inhabits.
AnswerKenntnis:
What if Starbuck simply became a Cylon (with the same lack of self-awareness as the sleepers)? The show's tech existed for genetic cloning, so it would be fairly simple for the Cylons to get a DNA sample & make another model...
QuestionKenntnis:
Why Didn't Sauron Become Invisible While Wearing the One Ring?
qn_description:
I'm curious as to why Sauron is the only being/person shown wearing the One Ring who does not become invisible? 

Isildur, Gollum, Bilbo, Frodo, and Samwise all become invisible while wearing the One Ring.

Why didn't Sauron become invisible while wearing the one ring?

I became interested after reading Pearsonartphoto's question asking what effect wearing the One Ring would have had on other beings.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
The Ring made its wearer invisible by shifting them mostly into the Unseen world. Gandalf told Frodo:


  You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for then you were
  half in the wraith-world yourself.


Gandalf also stated:


  if [a mortal] often uses the Ring to make himself invisible, he
  fades: he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks in the
  twilight under the eye of the dark power that rules the Rings.


But Sauron already lived in that world as a Maia - his body was something deliberately constructed. Sauron was naturally pure spirit, not a hybrid like mortals or Elves and Dwarves. Since his presence in the mortal world was in effect a construct of his own, not him himself, it was not shifted into the Unseen world.
AnswerKenntnis:
I was always under the impression that Sauron as the master of the One Ring and partial creator had much more access to the true powers of the ring. Invisibility seemed to be a very minor power that actually seemed to be drawing the wearer of the ring into the spirit realm. Sauron already seemed to have some mastery over the spirit realm and therefore wouldn't be subjected to becoming invisible unless he decided to.
AnswerKenntnis:
It was my understanding that the One Ring was built FOR Sauron. Everyone else got a pale reflection of what it could do. Sauron had full control over it and was capable of using it to do several different things. The others who have it did not have any control over it and so they a) had no control over how the ring behaved for them and b) the ring would begin to control THEM. In essence the ring is still working for Sauron, even when he is not wearing it.
AnswerKenntnis:
Invisibility for hobbits was caused by their natural stealth features. the Ring amplified that tendency, like all others (greed in Dwarves etc..).

In other words, the One Ring wasn't an "Invisibility Ring", it merely aided those predisposed to it to become invisible.
AnswerKenntnis:
Sauron doesn't turn invisible because he is above the material world. He is of the beings that helped make it.

You have Eru Il├║vatar who if you were to compare to Christianity, would be God. You have the Ainur who are equivalent to angels for all intents and purposes. The Ainur split into two groups, the Valar (The greater of the two) and the Maia (The lesser spirits). I say they can be called angels, but the Valar might even parallel the Greek gods.

Sauron is a maia, just like Gandalf, Saruman, the Balrog, etc. The Ring was created by him as a means to control the other rings he offered to the Elves, Men, and Dwarves. He had complete control over the One Ring because he was its creator and master. I imagine any Maia would have had the abilities or know-how to demonstrate some form of control with the ring, but the theory never gets tested, as Gandalf is too afraid to use it. (We can only speculate that he was only too weak to handle it in his human form, but maybe even Olorin (Gandalf as a Maia, not a man) could have been corrupted) We can also only speculate that Tom Bombadil, the only potential Ainur to have donned the ring besides Sauron, was even a Maia to begin with.

But Tom Bombadil did clue is into one thing, and that is that not ALL beings were drawn by its corruption, thus leading me personally to believe he was either Eru himself, or that if Gandalf had been in his true form, he would not have had problems with the Ring. As a manifestation of man, perhaps he was more prone to be corrupted. (A trait we see mirrored in the fact that the nazgul were the only ones to fall corrupt) (Edit: Oh and also in Saruman's betrayal)

Of course my TL;DR answer would be that once you've turned your back on your creator, and your big brother Morgoth is gone, and dissolved your soul into a material possession, what is left to turn invisible :D
AnswerKenntnis:
Also the power of the ring was relative to the power of the bearer and/or the distance from Sauron. If you recall, the ring does something completely different when Samwise puts it on in Mordor. 

Also, the ring was a completely different temptation to Gandalf and Galadriel because it would increase their overall power, not just turn them invisible. Bilbo and Frodo were mere hobbits. Thus it only granted them invisibility. I am willing to bet it granted Isildur powers beyond invisibility, thus why he prized it so. It doesn't go into detail as to what he gained from the ring.
QuestionKenntnis:
Are there any programmers in Star Trek?
qn_description:
Star Trek, for being a show about the distant future and extraordinarily high-tech equipment, sure seems to be lacking a lot of computer programmers. 

With technology as complex as it is, where are all the starship-based computer programmers responsible for preventing AI malfunctions aboard ships like the Enterprise?  

More specifically, we hear plenty of references to having to 'program in' certain things - Picard is dismayed in "All Good Things" that the past Enterprise doesn't yet have an Earl Grey Tea program, and we see plenty of holodeck programming going on, but is all of this programming done explicitly by the crewmember who just wants a cup of tea or a nice stroll along a sandy beach?  

In short: Are there any actual dedicated computer programmers in any Star Trek series or movie?  Even one example of a person with such a job would satisfy.
AnswersKenntnis
AnswerKenntnis:
Off the top of my head I can think of at least two examples;

Dr. Lewis Zimmerman

Dr Zimmerman is responsible for developing the software for the EMH (Emergency Medical Hologram). He works at Jupiter station. His Job title is explicitly stated as being "Director of Holographic Imaging and Programming" in the DS9 episode 'Doctor Bashir, I Presume'.



The Bynars

In the TNG episode "11001001" two pairs of Bynar programmers (named 11, 00, 10 and 01) come on board the Enterprise to perform an upgrade to the ship's operating system and holodeck systems. 



Regarding "ordinary" programmers, there's a tangential reference to several crew-members being trapped in the Enterprise' "programmersΓÇÖ rest room" in the TNG episode "Home Soil". This room seems to be connected (or at least near to) Main Engineering.
AnswerKenntnis:
There's so much leisurely dialog about how someone somewhere has "written a program" that handle tasks from the banal to the impressive, that one almost has to assume that everyone has a little bit of LCARS 'scripting' knowledge.

Of course, what it actually means to 'write' a program in the 24th century is up for debate. There's not a ton of time spent on the actual writing of the programs, justΓÇª that they were written.

For all we know it's a simple matter of speaking, "Computer!ΓÇª new Holodeck program; give me an approximation of the last known venue Mark Sandman from the ancient Earth band 'Morphine' played at." And the computer accounts for your bad English and compiles the program. Then you turn to your date and smile and say, "So, I've written this programΓÇª"
AnswerKenntnis:
Engineers like Geordi and Torres tend to dual as programmers - which makes sense, as some level of software knowledge is necessary for their career paths.

For example, Geordi can be seen debugging an Exocomp in TNG 6x09, The Quality of Life.  This was technically dealing with the hardware, as they were dealing with circuit pathways, but conceptually it's the same thing - and technology in Star Trek has a tendency to conflate the two.

For a more real-life type of programmer, Harry Kim is a good example.  In VOY 5x08, Nothing Human, he created a holographic Crell Moset, with the appropriate skill set to assist the Doctor with the alien life-form.  Giving the hologram the correct personality largely didn't need any specialized skills, as it happens often on the holodeck, but replicating the skill set required more work.  In another episode (which I cannot recall at the moment), he demonstrated to Paris how difficult it was to create a useful replacement for the Doctor.
AnswerKenntnis:
I'm surprised nobody has mentioned Dr. Daystrom, the inventor of the intelligent computer M5.



"You are great...I am great"
AnswerKenntnis:
What about Scotty programming a Macintosh of all things, in Star Trek IV?  (His initial attempt at talking into the mouse was not fruitful, but he quickly adapted.)



And Kirk hacked the Kobyashi Maru program.
AnswerKenntnis:
Yes, there are pure programmers. In the Star Trek TNG episode 11001001 we meet the Bynars, a race specialize in programming.  Their task for the episode was to maximize space and efficiency of the main computer. For most characters the show tends to treat programming as a skill that all Starfleet staff (especially engineering and science staff) have to differing levels of ability.  

For example, Spock programmed the Kobayashi Maru in the reboot.
AnswerKenntnis:
With the advancement of voice interaction systems, programming has mostly become natural language programming.  You have a conversation with the computer about what you want it to accomplish.  If there are parts it cannot construct from basic capabilities or existing programming, it will interrogate the programmer for additional information until they come to a final solution.

Only the most esoteric of programming (such as developing the first AI) would require a professional programmer.  The vast majority of programming would be handled by the masses.  I think this is keeping in line with the thinking of many futurists.
AnswerKenntnis:
In the second Star Trek movie Wrath of Khan, Kirk says;


  Kirk: "I reprogrammed the simulation so it was possible to rescue the ship."
  Saavik: "What?"
  David Marcus: "He cheated."
  Kirk: "I changed the conditions of the test. I got a commendation for original thinking. I don't like to lose."
AnswerKenntnis:
No one dedicated that I'm aware of, but in addition to the other things mentioned:


Spock programmed the computer to play chess (mentioned for example on the episode where someone frames Kirk and erases the computer in the process, ergo the chess game suddenly was much dumber than previous)
From the James Blish novelizations (not sure if the TV episodes made reference to this or not), there was at least one scene in which Kirk, Uhura, and Spock (if memory serves) were captured by people who spoke English and so Kirk, Uhura, and Spock communicated using a hodge podge of various other spoken languages plus Cobol or some other programming language.  Not sure if this was attempt at being hip or part of the original script, but would suggest that in the future most people going through the Academy had to take a semester or two of Computer Science 101.  (Presumably still using tapes at the primary mechanism for storing data)
